                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Technical Terms in English
absolute nature (Tib. dbyings, Skt. dhatu) The ultimate nature of reality,
often referred to as emptiness.
absolute nature of reality (Tib. chos kyi dbyings, Skt. dharmadhatu) The
essential nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana.
afflicted cognition (Tib. nyon yid, Skt. klistamanas) The natural potency of
the darkness of ignorance and delusion.
attentional referent (Tib. gtad so) The object of the mind that is involved in
grasping.
awareness (Tib. rig pa, Skt. vidya) The comprehension of samsara and nirvana as
being totally subsumed within great spiritual awakening, which entails a
natural liberation in the ground absolute nature, the great, pure equality of
samsara and nirvana
awareness that is present as the ground (Tib. gzhir gnas kyi rig pa) The all-
pervasive, fundamental nature of awareness, which is equivalent to the
dharmakaya
basis of designation (Tib. gdags gzhi) The objective basis on which a
conceptual designation is made.
buddha-field (Tib. zhing khams, Skt. ksetra) A "pure realm," which is brought
forth spontaneously from a buddha's mind.
buddha-nature (Tib. sangs rgyas kyi rigs, Skt. buddhadhatu) The primordially
pure, essential nature of the mind, equivalent to awareness, which is none
other than the dharmakaya, but may be regarded provisionally as one's capacity
for achieving spiritual awakening.
chosen deity (Tib. yi dam, Skt. istadevata) The enlightened manifestation, or
embodiment, which one chooses as one's primary object of refuge and meditative
practice.
citta lamp of the flesh (Tib. tsiitta sha'i sgron ma) The "lamp" located at the
heart and included among the six lamps discussed in the teachings on the Leap-
over.
cogitation (Tib. bsam mno) Mental activity involving reification of the subject
and object.
cognition (Tib. yid, Skt. manas) The mind of every sentient being, which serves
as the basis for the emergence of all ideation, and which transforms into the
objects of all appearances.
cognitive obscuration (Tib. shes bya'i sgrib pa, Skt. jneya-avarana) The subtle
obscurations of the mind, specifically the habitual propensities of mental
afflictions and the appearance of true existence, which impede the experience
of omniscience.
complete, definite path (Tib. lam nges rdzogs) Within the Vajrayana, the path
that reveals the deities and buddha-fields as definitely existent, self-
defining objects, and which solely emphasizes the avenue of conventional,
skillful means.
conceptual elaboration (Tib. spros pa, Skt. prapanca) Conceptual constructs
such as those of existence, non-existence, birth, and cessation.
cone (Tib. a thung) A slender cone of light that is visualized in certain
meditations, especially at the navel cakra.
consciousness (Tib. shes pa, mam par shes pa, Skt. jnana, vijnana) The clear
and knowing qualities of the mind that emerge in the aspect of the object and
are bound by reification.
contemplative (Tib. rnal 'byor pa, Skt. yogin) A practitioner of contemplation.
creative display (Tib. rtsal) An effulgence, or manifestation, such as the
creative displays of primordial wisdom.
cultivation of the spirit (Tib. sems bskyed, Skt. cittotpada) The ultimate
cultivation of the spirit entails knowing one's own essential nature as the
homogenous, pervasive nature of being of samsara and nirvana, while the
Mahayana, relative cultivation of the spirit is developing an altruistic
aspiration to achieve spiritual awakening for the benefit of all beings. The
cultivation of the spirit for Hinayana practitioners entails developing
motivations for spiritual practice appropriate to their respective paths.
definitive meaning (Tib. nges don, Skt. nitartha) The meaning of ultimate
reality.
delusion (Tib. 'khrul ba) Principally the delusion of reifying oneself and
other phenomena, which acts as the root of all other mental afflictions.
delusive appearance (Tib. 'khrul snang) The reified appearance of phenomena
arising due to delusion.
descended total-ground (Tib. thog pheb kyi kun gzhi) The essential nature, or
one taste, of all phenomena, which is free of conceptual elaboration.
direct vision of reality-itself (Tib. chos nyid mngon sum gyi snang ba) The
first of the four visions that arise in the course of the Leap-over practice,
in which one directly ascertains the nature of existence of suchness, or
ultimate truth. This realization corresponds to the attainment of the first
aryabodhisattva ground, and provides one the confidence of never returning to
samsara.
directional guardian (Tib. phyogs skyong, Skt. dikpala) Powerful beings who
guard the ten directions.
ego-grasping (Tib. ngar 'dzin, Skt. ahamkara) Reification of one's own
identity.
eight classes of haughty non-human beings (Tib. mi ma yin sde brgyad) Classes
of local gods.
eight collections of consciousness (Tib. mam shes kyi tshogs brgyad) The six
sense consciousnesses, afflicted cognition, and total-ground consciousness.
eight freedoms (Tib. rnam thar brgyad, Skt. astauvimoksa) (1) The freedom of
the formed observation of form, (2) the freedom of the formless observation of
form, (3) the freedom of beauty, (4) the freedom of limitless space, (5) the
freedom of limitless consciousness, (6) the freedom of nothingness, (7) the
freedom of the peak of mundane existence, and (8) the freedom of cessation.
eight great devas (Tib. lha chen po brgyad) Mahesvara, Indra, Brahma, Visnu,
Kamesvara, Ganapati, Bhringiridhi, and Kumarasanmukha.
eight great nagas (Tib. klu chen po brgyad) Ananta, Taksaka, Atibala, Kulika,
Vasuki, Sankhapala, Padma, and Varuna.
eight great planets (Tib. gza' chen po brgyad) Venus, Jupiter, the moon,
Mercury, Mars, Rahula, the sun, and Saturn.
eight mundane concerns (Tib. 'jig rten chos brgyad) Material gain and loss,
pleasure and pain, praise and abuse, and good and bad reputation.
eight qualities of water (Tib. chu'i yon tan brgyad) Cool, delicious, light,
smooth, limpid, odorless, not harmful to the stomach or to the throat.
eight potencies (Tib. nus pa) Heavy, oily, mild, sharp, light, rough, hot, and
cool.
embodiment (Tib. sku, Skt. kaya) An aspect of a buddha, including the
dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and nirmanakaya.
emptiness (Tib. stong pa nyid, Skt. sunyata) The absence of true existence of
all phenomena, which itself is not objectively or truly existent.
enlightenment (Tib. byang chub, Skt. bodhi) Spiritual awakening.
enmeshed mindfulness (Tib. 'jur bu'i dran pa) Mindfulness of the steady, vivid
manifestation of thoughts without responding to them with hope and fear or joy
and sorrow.
essential nature (Tib. ngo bo) The fundamental nature of a phenomenon, as in
the case of awareness being the essential nature of the mind.
ethically neutral (Tib. lung ma bstan, Skt. avyakrta) Neither virtuous nor
nonvirtuous.
expression (Tib. rtsal) A creative display, or manifestation, such as samsara
and nirvana being expressions of awareness.
extrasensory perception (Tib. mngon par shes pa, Skt. abhijna) Exception modes
of perception that arise along the path to enlightenment.
extinction into reality-itself (Tib. chos nyid zad pa) The fourth, and final,
vision on the path of the Leap-over, in which all phenomena indescribably
dissolve into the absolute nature. This stage corresponds to the attainment of
the supreme ground of a spontaneously present vidyadhara on the mantra path,
which surpasses the tenth ground known as the Cloud of Dharma.
five absolute natures (Tib. dbyings lnga, Skt. pancadhatu) The five primordial
wisdoms.
five deeds of immediate retribution (Tib. mtshams med pa lnga) Killing one's
father, killing one's mother, killing an arhat, maliciously drawing the blood
of a buddha, and causing a schism in the sangha. If one commits any such deed,
one immediately falls to hell upon death, without spending any time in the
intermediate state.
five derivative elements (Tib. 'byung phran lnga) Water, space, earth, fire,
and air.
five embodiments (Tib. sku lnga, Skt. pancakaya) Dharmakaya, sambhogakaya,
nirmanakaya, svabhavakaya, and vajrakaya.
five essential natures (Tib. ngo bo lnga) The five primordial wisdoms.
five great elements (Tib. 'byung ba chen po lnga) Lights of the five primary
colors of white, blue, yellow, red, and green.
five, impure, samsaric vital energies (Tib. ma dag pa'i 'khor ba'i rlung lnga)
Emerging vital energy, transformative vital energy, grasping vital energy,
differentiating vital energy, and destructive vital energy.
five poisons (Tib. dug lnga) Delusion, hatred, pride, attachment, and jealousy.
five primordial wisdoms (Tib. ye shes lnga, Skt. pancajnana) Mirror-like
primordial wisdom, primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality,
primordial wisdom of equality, primordial wisdom of discernment, and primordial
wisdom of accomplishment.
five quintessences (Tib. mdangs ma lnga) The quintessences of the five
primordial wisdoms.
fluid lasso lamp (Tib. rgyang zhags chu'i sgron ma) In the Leap-over
terminology , this is the lamp of the eyes, which are fluid and are able to
apprehend objects far away, as if they were caught with a lasso. This lamp is
like the flowers of a tree that has the citta lamp of the flesh as its root,
and the hollow crystal kati channel as its trunk, and the term fluid lasso lamp
is collectively given to all three, which are known as the three lamps of the
vessel.
four occasions (Tib. dus bzhi) Pre-dawn, early morning, noon, and dusk.
Four Thoughts that rum the Mind (Tib. blo ldog rnam pa bzhi) Meditations on the
precious human life of leisure and opportunity, death and impermanence, the
miserable nature of samsara, and the nature of actions and their ethical
consequences.
Four Immeasurables (Tib. tshad med bzhi, Skt. caturapramana) Loving-kindness,
compassion, empathetic joy, and equanimity.
freedom from conceptual elaboration (Tib. spros pa dang bral ba) The second of
the four stages of Mahamudra meditation.
gaining confidence (Tib. gding thob pa) Identifying awareness, then bringing
forth spacious awareness, free of activity, and by practicing that
uninterruptedly, finally achieving stability within oneself.
generic emblem (Tib. zad pa, Skt. krtsna, Pali kasina) Symbolic representations
of the five elements, which are used in meditative objects in the cultivation
of meditative quiescence.
Great Perfection (Tib. rDzogs pa chen po, Skt. Mahasandhi) The ultimate
spiritual vehicle and realization, according to the rNying ma order of Tibetan
Buddhism.
Great Perfection of the complete, definite path (Tib. lam nges rdzogs kyi
rdzogs chen) The simultaneous progression through all the grounds and paths by
establishing with discerning wisdom the ethically neutral state of the Great
Perfection that is present as the ground.
Great Perfection of the four modes of existence (Tib. gnas lugs bzhi'i rdzogs
chen)
great transference rainbow body (Tib. 'ja' lus 'pho ba chen po) The highest
level achievement of the rainbow body, associated with the dharmakaya, in which
all the material aggregates of one's body are extinguished while one is still
living, leaving only a body of light that is unperishing. With the achievement
of the second level of the rainbow body, associated with the sambhogakaya, at
death one's body dissolves into rainbow light, leaving only one's hair and
nails behind. With the achievement of the third level of the rainbow body,
associated with the nirmanakaya, at death one's body shrinks considerably in
size, sometimes down to the size of an infant.
ground (Tib. gzhi, Skt. asraya) The ground of the whole of samsara and nirvana,
which is the dharmakaya.
ground absolute nature (Tib. gzhi dbyings) The dharmakaya.
ground-awareness (Tib. gzhi'i rig pa, Skt. asrayavidya) The primordial nature
of the mind, which is beyond the three times and all conceptual elaborations.
ground-consciousness (Tib. gzhi'i shes pa, Skt. asrayajnana) The unceasing
stream of consciousness that goes from one life to another and finally to the
state of spiritual awakening, so it may become virtuous or nonvirtuous. Only
when its essential nature becomes manifest, is it seen to be of the nature of
unstructured awareness (rig pa). As such, it seems to be identical to the
total-ground consciousness.
grounds and paths (Tib. sa lam, Skt. bhumimarga) The stages along which one
progresses to spiritual awakening.
guardian of the doctrine (Tib. bka' srung) A powerful being who protects the
Dharma.
guardian of the remains (Tib. lhag skyong) A being to whom the remains of the
ganacakra are offered.
habitual propensity (Tib. bag chags, Skt. vasana) A mental imprint accumulated
as a result of previous experiences or actions, which influences later events
and conduct.
hollow crystal kati channel (ka ti shel gyi sbu gu can) Among the six lamps,
this is a single channel, one-eighth the width of a hair of a horse's tail,
with two branches that stem from inside the heart, curve around the back of the
ears, and come to the pupils of the eyes.
ideology (Tib. grub mtha', Skt. siddhanta) A philosophical system of thought.
innate luster (Tib. rang gdangs) The natural luminosity of awareness.
insight (Tib. lhag mthong, Skt. vipasyana) Contemplative realization of the
nature of phenomena.
intermediate state (Tib. bar do, Skt. antarabhava) The transitional process of
becoming, following death and prior to one's next rebirth.
intermediate teachings (Tib. bka' bar pa) The Second turning of the Wheel of
Dharma.
introspection (Tib. shes bzhin, Skt. samprajanya) The mental faculty by which
one ascertains how the mind is functioning, which is crucial to all forms of
meditation.
karmic energy (Tib. las rlung) A vital energy coursing through the body which
is propelled by one's previous karma.
karmic momentum (Tib. las 'phro) The carry-over into this life of one's karma
from previous lifetimes.
lamp of the empty bindus (Tib. thig le stong pa'i sgron ma) The appearance of
the five quintessences in luminous, spherical forms called bindus.
lamp of the pristine absolute nature (Tib. dbyings mam par dag pa'i sgron ma)
The pristine expanse of space, in which appear bindus of five-colored lights
and vertical and horizontal vajra-strands.
lamp of self-arisen wisdom (Tib. shes rab rang byung gi sgron ma) One's own
awareness, the sugatagarbha, which witnesses the displays of primordial wisdom.
Leap-over (Tib. thod rgal) The second of the two phases of the practice of the
Great Perfection, which is aimed at realizing the spontaneous manifestations of
the dharmakaya.
life force channel (Tib. srog rtsa) The channel in the heart through which
courses the life-sustaining wind.
meditative absorption (Tib. snyoms 'jug, Skt. samapatti) An advanced state of
meditative concentration in the formless realm, including boundless
consciousness, boundless space, nothingness, and neither- discernment- nor-non-
discernment.
meditative experience (Tib. nyams) Mundane experiences produced by one's
previous behavioral patterns, and occurring within the context of one's
familiar conceptual framework. The normal response to such experiences is to
grasp onto them by conceptually identifying and classifying them.
meditative stabilization ( Tib. bsam gtan, Skt. dhyana) An advanced state of
meditative concentration included in the form realm, including the four
meditative stabilizations.
mental cognition (Tib. yid, Skt. manas) See cognition.
mental process (Tib. sems byung, Skt. caitta) A mental process that arises in
conjunction with consciousness, by means of which one engages in various ways
with the objects of apprehension.
mind-itself (Tib. sems nyid, Skt. cittata) The essential nature of the mind,
which is awareness, also known as the sugatagarbha.
Mind Lineage of the Jinas (Tib. rGyal ba dgongs pa'i brgyud pa) The most
fundamental lineage of the Great Perfection that arises due to the single,
absolute nature of the minds of all the jinas of the three times.
mindfulness (Tib. dran pa, Skt. smrti) The mental faculty of attending
continuously, without forgetfulness, to an object with which one is already
familiar.
mirror-like primordial wisdom (Tib. me long Ita bu'i ye shes, Skt. adarsajnana)
A primordial wisdom that is of a limpid, clear nature free of contamination,
which allows for the unceasing appearances of all manner of objects.
mundane existence (Tib. srid pa, Skt. bhava) The cycle of existence, in which
one is propelled from life to life by the force of one's mental afflictions and
karma.
natural path of the powerful view (Tib. lta ba gyad kyi lam) The method by
which one achieves stability in one's own awareness; ordinary appearances and
clinging are transferred to the nature of buddha-fields; and one's body,
speech, and mind are transferred to the domain of the three vajras.
naturally settled mindfulness (Tib. rang babs kyi dran pa) The state of
awareness in which consciousness mindfully comes to rest in its own state, and
with little clinging to experiences, it settles into its own natural state free
of modification.
nature of existence (Tib. gnas lugs) The fundamental mode of existence of all
phenomena, which is emptiness.
one taste (Tib. ro gcig) The third of the four stages of Mahamudra meditation.
Oral Lineage of Individuals (Tib. gang zag snyan khung gi brgyud pa) The
lineage of the Great Perfection by which the practical instructions naturally
arise as an oral lineage and an entrance to the disciples path, revealed by
themselves, not by human beings, as an apparitional display of primordial
wisdom.
ornamental wheel (Tib. rgyan gyi 'khor lo) A metaphor for the qualities of a
buddha. The term ornament refers to those excellent qualities, and the term
circle refers to the all-encompassing, inexhaustible nature of those outer,
inner, and secret qualities.
personal identity (Tib. gang zag gi bdag, Skt. pudgalatmya) An intrinsically
existent self, which is actually nonexistent but which is grasped as real by
the deluded mind.
phenomenal identity (Tib. chos kyi bdag, Skt. dharmatmya) An intrinsically
existent identity of phenomena other that the self, which is actually
nonexistent but which is grasped as real by the deluded mind.
philosophical stance (Tib. spros pa'i mtha') A conceptual c:onstruct such as
that of existence and nonexistence, which is apprehended by way of dualistic
grasping.
practical instructions (Tib. gdams ngag, Skt. upadesa) Quintessential guidance
in spiritual practice, which synthesizes the teachings of the buddhas into
specific practices for specific individuals according to their needs.
practice of deliverance (Tib. bsgral las) The ferocious activity of taking
someone's life and delivering this person to a higher state of existence.
precept (Tib. man ngag, Skt. upadesa) See practical instructions.
primordial wisdom (Tib. ye shes, Skt. jnana) The manifest state of the ground,
which is self-arisen, naturally clear, free of outer and inner obscuration, and
is the all-pervasive, limpid, clear infinity of space, free of contamination.
primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality (Tib. chos kyi dbyings kyi
ye shes, Skt. dharmadhatujnana) The primordial wisdom the essential nature of
which is primordial, great emptiness, and which realizes the absolute nature of
the whole of samsara and nirvana.
primordial wisdom of accomplishment (Tib. bya ba sgrub pa'i ye shes, Skt.
krtyanusthanajnana) The primordial wisdom by which all pure, free,
simultaneously perfected deeds and activities are accomplished naturally, of
their own accord.
primordial wisdom of discernment (Tib. so sor rtog pa'i ye shes, Skt.
pratyaveksanajnana) The primordial wisdom that is an unceasing avenue of
illumination of the qualities of primordial wisdom,
primordial wisdom of equality (Tib. mnyam pa nyid kyi ye shes, Skt.
samatajnana) The primordial wisdom that equally pervades the nonobjective
emptiness of the whole of samsara and nirvana.
primordial wisdom of knowing reality as it is (Tib. ji ita ba mkhyen pa'i ye
shes, Skt. yathavidjnana) The primordial knowledge of the ultimate nature of
existence.
primordial wisdom of seeing the full range of reality (Tib. ji snyed pa gzigs
pa 'i ye shes, Skt. yavadvidjnana) The primordial knowledge of all phenomena
throughout space and time.
progress in meditative experience (Tib. nyams gong 'phel ba) The second of the
four stages on the path of the Leap-over, in which all appearances during and
after meditation transform into displays of light and rainbow bindus with ever
increasing clarity, until finally all ordinary appearances vanish and dissolve
into continuous, omnipresent displays of visions of light. This stage
corresponds to the attainment of the fifth ground known as the Difficult to
Practice.
propitiatory practice (Tib. bsnyen sgrub, Skt. sevasadhana) A meditative
practice especially on the stage of generation that deepens the relationship
between oneself and one's chosen deity.
provisional meaning (Tib. drang don, Skt. neyartha) The symbolic, relative, or
contextual meaning, as opposed to the actual, ultimate, or absolute meaning.
quiescence (Tib. zhi gnas, Skt. samatha) An advanced degree of meditative
concentration in which attentional stability and vividness have been developed
to the point that one can fully engage in the cultivation of insight.
quintessence (Tib. dvangs ma) The pristine essence of a phenomenon.
ransom-torma (Tib. glud gtor) A ritual offering made to a being to persuade
them not to interfere with one's spiritual practice.
reaching consummate awareness (Tib. rig pa tshad phebs) The third of the four
stages on the path of the Leap-over, in which the entire universe appears to be
totally pervaded with rainbow light and blazing fire, and everything appears as
bindus in which the five classes of male and female peaceful and wrathful
divine embodiments appear in union. This stage of spontaneous manifestation
corresponds to the attainment of the eighth ground known as the Immovable.
real going for refuge in the mode of being (Tib. gnas lugs don gyi skyabs 'gro)
Determining that all phenomena in the whole of samsara and nirvana are of an
empty, identityless nature, and finally confirming by means of one's own
experience that one's own awareness has never been anything but a display of
the embodiments and primordial wisdoms.
reality-itself (Tib. chos nyid, Skt. dharmata) The essential nature of
phenomena, which is emptiness, also known as the absolute nature.
realization (Tib. rtogs pa) The. subtle, exact knowledge of how all appearing
phenomena. are nonobjective and empty from their own side, culminating m the
decisive knowledge of the one taste of great emptiness, the fact that all of
samsara and nirvana naturally arises from the expanse of the ground and is not
established as anything else.
samadhi of all appearances (Tib. kun tu snang ba'i ting nge 'dzin) The capacity
for all appearances to arise.
samadhi of suchness (Tib. de bzhin nyid kyi ting nge 'dzin, Skt. tathata-
samadhi) Meditation on the entire universe dissolving into the absolute nature
as illusory apparitions.
segregation (Tib. ru shan) The Leap-over practice of separating samsara from
nirvana with respect to one's body, speech, and mind.
self-concept (Tib. bdag rtog) One's reified sense of one's own identity.
seven enjoyments (Tib. nyer spyod bdun) The seven offerings of drinking water,
water for bathing the feet, flowers, incense, light, perfume, and food.
seven inner preliminaries (Tib. nang gi sngon 'gro bdun) (1) taking refuge and
cultivating the Spirit of Awakening, (2) offering prostrations, (3) offering
the mandala, (4) practicing the purificatory meditation and mantra of
Vajrasattva, (5) guru yoga, (6) transference of consciousness, and (7)
Severance.
seven types of precious substances (Tib. rin po che sna bdun) Ruby, sapphire,
lapis-lazuli, emerald, diamond, pearl, and coral. An alternate list includes
lapis-lazuli, gold, silver, crystal, kakkatana, red pearl, and iron.
Severance (Tib. gcod) A meditative practice of imaginatively offering up one's
entire being as a means to realizing the empty nature of all phenomena,
severing all clinging onto the appearances of the three realms, and realizing
that all gods and demons are none other than one's own appearances.
sign (Tib. mtshan ma, Skt. nimitta) An object grasped by the conceptual mind.
sin (Tib. sdig pa, Skt. papa) A nonvirtue that karmically ripens in this or
future lifetimes as misery and adversity.
six lamps (Tib. sgron me drug) The three lamps of the vessel--namely, the citta
lamp of the flesh, the hollow crystal kati channel, and the fluid lasso lamp--
and the three lamps of the vital essence--namely, the lamp of the pristine
absolute nature, the lamp of the empty bindu, and the lamp of self-arisen
wisdom.
space-release (Tib. klong grol) A natural state of liberation in which
appearances and awareness become simultaneous, so things seem to be released
simply upon being known. Thus, arising and release are simultaneous. As soon as
things merely arise from their own space, they are released back into their own
space, like lightning that flashes from the sky and vanishes back into space.
spirit of aspiring for awakening (Tib. smon pa'i sems bskyed, Skt. pranidhana-
bodhicitta) In the context of the Great Perfection, this is comprehending the
nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana by means of discerning wisdom.
spirit of awakening (Tib. byang chub kyi sems, Skt. bodhicitta) In the context
of the Great Perfection, the primordial, originally pure ground, which pervades
the whole of samsara and nirvana. The nominal cultivation of the spirit of
awakening entails bringing forth the motivation to liberate all sentient beings
of the three worlds from the ocean of suffering of mundane existence and bring
them to the state of omniscience.
spirit of venturing towards awakening (Tib. 'jug pa'i sems bskyed, Skt .
prasthana-bodhicitta) In the context of the Great Perfection, this is the
perception of samsara and nirvana as displays of the dharmakaya.
spiritual awakening (Tib. byang chub, Skt. bodhi) Enlightenment in which all
obscurations are purified and all excellent qualities are brought to
fulfillment.
spiritual mentor (Tib. bla ma, Skt. guru) A spiritual teacher who leads one to
the state of liberation and spiritual awakening.
spiritual vehicle (Tib. theg pa, Skt. yana) A theoretical and practical system
of spiritual development leading to spiritual awakening.
stage of generation (Tib. bskyed rim, Skt. utpattikrama) A Vajrayana system of
practice, corresponding to Mahayoga, in which one's own body, speech, and mind
are regarded as displays of the vajra body, speech, and mind of one's chosen
deity. As a result of such practice, one achieves stability upon one's own
awareness; ordinary appearances and clinging are transferred to the nature of
buddha-fields; and one's body, speech, and mind are transformed into the three
vajras.
substantial cause (Tib. nyer len) A substantial cause of a phenomenon is a
prior phenomenon that actually transforms into the subsequent phenomenon that
it produces, as a seed transforms into a sprout
suchness (Tib. de bzhin nyid, Skt. tattata) The ineffable reality of emptiness,
the ultimate nature of all phenomena.
supreme son kila (Tib. phur pa sras mchog) The wrathful manifestation of one's
chosen deity .
Symbolic Lineage of the Vidyadharas (Tib. rig 'dzin brda yi brgyud pa) The
lineage of the Great Perfection by which the symbolic signs of the space
treasury of reality-itself are spontaneously released without reliance upon the
stages of spiritual training and practice.
ten fields (Tib. zhing bcu) (1) Destroying the Teaching, (2) despising the
Three Jewels, (3) robbing the possessions of the Sangha, (4) abusing the
Mahayana, (5) threatening the bodies of spiritual mentors, (6) holding vajra
siblings and friends in contempt, (7) creating obstacles to spiritual practice,
(8) being utterly devoid of mercy and compassion, (9) lacking samayas and vows,
and (10) holding false views concerning actions and their consequences.
three doors of liberation (Tib. mam thar sgo gsum) Emptiness, signlessness, and
desirelessness.
Three Jewels (Tib. dkon mchog gsum, Skt. triratna) The Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha.
three modes of appearances (Tib. snang tshul gsum) Appearances in the form of
one's environment, one's body, and the five sensory objects.
three primordial wisdoms (Tib. ye shes gsum) Detached, unimpeded, primordial
wisdom of all phenomena in the past, present, and future.
three realms (Tib. khams gsum, Skt. tridhatu) The desire realm, form realm, and
formless realm.
three roots (Tib. rtsa ba gsum) The spiritual mentor, the chosen deity , and
the c;Iaki11i.
three secrets (Tib. gsang ba gsum) The body, speech, and mind of a buddha.
three sweet offerings (Tib. mngar gsum) White sugar, molasses, and honey.
three types of modification (Tib. bcos pa rnam gsum) The three types of
modification of one's body, speech, and mind.
three white offerings (Tib. dkar gsum) Milk, curd, and butter.
total-ground (Tib. kun gzhi, Skt. alaya) A state of consciousness that is
immaterial and non-conceptual, a space-like vacuity and blankness in which
appearances are impeded. This state is experienced in deep, dreamless sleep,
when one faints, and when one dies.
total-ground consciousness (Tib. kun gzhi mam shes, Skt. alayavijnana) An
inwardly-directed, brilliant state of consciousness in which no thoughts or
appearances arise and which is preceded by an experience of emptiness and
luminosity .
training in malleability (Tib. mnyen btsal) A Leap-over practice in which one
visualizes hum syllables emerging from and withdrawing back into one's heart as
a means to gain mastery over one's vital energies and mind.
training in power (Tib. rtsal sbyang ba) A Leap-over practice in which one
forcefully, meditatively permeates one's environment and body with hum
syllables, finally dissolving them all into emptiness.
transitional process (Tib. bar do, Skt. antarabhava) Any one of the six
transitional processes of living, dreaming, meditative stabilization, dying,
reality-itself, and the transitional process of becoming.
transitional process of becoming (Tib. srid ba bar do) The dream-like
intermediate state immediately following the transitional process of reality-
itself, in which one is on one's way to one's next rebirth.
transference and merging into a domain (Tib. 'pho ba grong 'jug) The
culminating phase of the stage of generation.
transference (Tib. 'pho ba) According to the Great Perfection, the unsurpassed
"transference" is the realization of the pristine space of the absolute nature
of reality, the sugatagarbha.
treasure-revealer (Tib. gter ston) A highly realized being who reveals precious
spiritual teachings concealed either in the ground by path enlightened beings
or reveals such teachings from the nature of one's own awareness, as in the
case of the revelation of this treatise by Dudjom Linpga.
two goals (Tib. don gnyis) The goals for oneself and the goals for others.
universal ground (Tib. spyi gzhi) Emptiness, as the foundation for the whole of
samsara and nirvana.
ultimate spirit of awakening (Tib. byang chub kyi sems, Skt. bodhicitta) The
realization of that great reality that pervades the whole of samsara and
nirvana.
vajra-essences (Tib. rdo rje'i snying po) The syllables om, ah, and hum.
vajra-strand luster of awareness (Tib. rig gdangs rdo rje lu gu rgyud)
vice (Tib. sdig pa, Skt. papa) A non-virtuous deed of the body, speech, or
mind.
vital essence (Tib. bcud) The vital core of such phenomena as the five
elements.
wisdom (Tib. shes rab, Skt. prajna) The knowledge that determines everything
included in the phenomenal world of samsara and nirvana as being empty,
identityless, and nonobjective, such that all appearances and mental states are
gradually extinguished in the absolute nature.
wisdom of pristine space (Tib. nam mkha' rnam par dag pa'i shes rab) The
recognition and ascertainment of all of samsara and nirvana as displays of
space.
youthful vase body (Tib. gzhon nu bum sku, Skt. kumarakalasakaya) The awareness
of Samantabhadra, which is of the oceanic nature of the embodiments and
primordial wisdoms having six qualities: (1) externally luminous consciousness
is withdrawn into itself, and the great, internally luminous, original, ground-
absolute nature appears to itself, (2) it transcends the ground, (3) it
differentiates, (4) it is liberated upwards, (5) it arises from nothing else,
and (6) it dwells in its own place. This state of awakening is likened to a
vase, for, as the sole bindu, it encompasses the whole of samsara and nirvana,
while transcending the three times. It is called "youthful," for it is not
subject to aging or degeneration, and it is called a "body" for it is the
aggregate of all the inexhaustible bodies, speech, minds, qualities, and
enlightened activities of all the buddhas.
