


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 301
Like the noises made by a madman, your mind may ramble aimlessly, without being
able to remedy or alter it in any way. Due to the disorders in your heart and
life force channel, at times you may weep, groan, sigh, exhale forcefully, or
constantly want to be on the move, without being able to remain in one place.
Your environment may seem so miserable that you do not want to stay where you
are, and you may constantly experience a wide range of confused emotions. So
recognize this! You may have various sorts of visions of gods and demons or
random sensations of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, and so on. These are the outer
signs of the appearances of the clear light.
At the beginning stage, remain motionlessly with your face completely covered,
[433] and bindus from the size of the dots on dice up to the size of thumb
rings will appear. At times, the visions of the absolute nature, together with
the bindus, will not be evident, but the luster of awareness will appear in
forms called vajra-strands. At times the bindus of the absolute nature will not
arise, then they will fluctuate in size, and they will become unclear, no
matter how much you try. On occasion, the visions of the absolute nature will
repeatedly appear in the expanse of clear light in spherical forms of five-colored 
lights. Those are the criteria of familiarity with the practice.
At this time, even if your life comes to an end, you will go straight to a
nirmanakaya buddha-field, with no intermediate state. By gaining greater
familiarity with this practice, the visions of the absolute nature will appear
resplendently like loosely woven cloth, and they will appear in the sky in the
form of dangling lattices and half-lattices. In the midst of the visions of the
absolute nature, all sorts of images may appear, such as stupas, lotuses, white
conches, wheels, vajras, jewels, swastikas, swords, spear-tips, images like
stacks of books, [434] and various forms of letters and animals. Whatever
appears, those are visions of the absolute nature, so know that it is important
not to
Page 302
mistake them for bindus. Bindus will appear in round shapes, gradually growing
from the size of thumb rings to the size of cups and on to the size of round
shields.
At the beginning stage, the lights of awareness, called vajra-strands, no
broader than a hair's width, radiant like the sheen of gold, appear to move to
and fro, never at rest, like hairs moving in the breeze. Even as they stabilize
a little bit, they become clear and lustrous, temporarily wavy, and they slow
down somewhat, appearing like deer running across a mountainside. Then as you
become somewhat more accustomed to the practice, they appear like strung
pearls, and they slowly circle around the peripheries of the bindus of the
absolute nature, like bees circling flowers. Their clear and lustrous
appearance is an indication of the manifestation of awareness. Their fine, wavy
shapes indicate liberation due to the channels, and their moving to and fro
indicates liberation due to the vital energies. Due to the qualities of
purifying the bindus, [435] the presence of bindus on curves [of the strands]
indicates that one will be liberated. By the power of meditation, they appear
in the forms of lattices and half-lattices, transparent like crystal, radiant
like gold, and like necklaces of medium-sized strung crystals. The criterion of
having thoroughly familiarized oneself with the practice is that they appear
indeterminately, but they remain stable, without moving or vibrating. In this
case, the name of the cause is also given to the result, and that is the vajra-
strand luster of awareness. They are the luster of awareness, so they gradually
become as stable as awareness itself. They are not the real, self-arisen lamps
of awareness and wisdom.
Once the beginner's phase has passed, the visions of the absolute nature become
beautiful, clear, and stable, and they take on various divine forms. Although
they may increase and decrease, before a single inner sign has arisen, the
appearances of such outer signs are premature, like a dzaki flower that
Page 303
blooms out of season. So that does not constitute progress in terms of
experiential realization. Even when the inner signs occur, the outer bindus of
the absolute nature may become indistinct. That happens to some people who have
a dominant water element, [436] and the elements of their channels are such
that the development of their experiential realizations proceedst like a slow
foot race. If that is mistakenly identified as progress in meditative
experience and as reaching consummate awareness, even if visions occur that
would seemingly indicate the extinction into reality-itself, in fact one has in
no way gone beyond ordinary consciousness. Indeed, one is proceeding in the
opposite direction, contrary to the tantras, so this is an enormous error. It
is important to know this.
Even if muddled outer signs and vivid images are present, recognize the
importance of the emergence of the inner signs. Although experiential visions
may appear to your inner consciousness, if the outer signs are unclear, that
indicates that you will not be able to gaze at the clear light for sustained
periods, and there will be obstacles. Know this as well. When experiential
visions homogeneously arise inwardly, the visions of the Breakthrough are
aroused, causing the meditative experiences of the Leap-over to be disrupted.
However, when the visions have not matured into the clear light, the potency of
the clear light has not been perfected. If they stop, the visions of light will
not develop, and that indicates that the eye of primordial wisdom has not
entered the eye of wisdom76. Therefore, you should constantly strive in the
practice.
When encountering that situation, some people develop their minds with
meditative experiences, then travel to many regions [437] and finally succumb
to adversities. Consequently, they get stuck there and do not achieve
liberation. Some people encounter images of the bodies, speech, and minds of
buddhas
_______________
76 The eye of wisdom sees appearances of the absolute nature, of bindus, and
vajra-strands that arise simply by attending to visions of light, whereas
during meditative equipoise the eye of primordial wisdom sees the displays of
the absolute nature and of bindus as they increase, stabilize, and become
continuous.
Page 304
which are actually apparitions of maras, gods, and demons--and due to visions
from the power [of progress in meditative experience], words of Dharma appear
to them as written letters, and they are consumed by the desire to write them
down. Out of lust, they consort with women, and consequently claim to be
treasure-revealers. There are many such people who bring ruin to themselves and
others. Due to extrasensory perception and visions in dreams, some people
perceive good and bad things in themselves and others, and they leave such
things as hand-prints in rock and other objects. Signs may manifest due to the
apparitions of gods and demons, causing them to declare themselves to be
siddhas. They then take a consort and take control of those around them. Laying
the foundations for prestige and great deeds, they spend their whole lives in
constant, relentless striving. Those who spend their lives tricking others with
magic rituals to dispel obstacles and wander around begging and seeking wealth
without satiation are possessed by maras and demons. Even if they become
renunciates and gurus with great followings, they are deludedly involved in the
eight mundane concerns and the negative conduct of maras.
Some people take meditative experiences to be illnesses and [438] regard
conducive circumstances as demonic. When they receive medical treatment and
perform rituals, they become confused by all kinds of divinations and
diagnoses, and they become overwhelmed by speculations. Upon noting bad dreams
and evil omens, fantasies arise even more forcefully, and those outer
manifestations are apparitions of gods and demons. Any of the 404 kinds of
illnesses in the body, including disorders of the wind, bile, phlegm, and
combinations of them, are inner manifestations as bodily pain. If you regard
them as being truly existent, you fall into error, and you will either die or
deludedly fall under the influence of objective adversities.
Page 305
Some people go through various kinds of unbearable miseries and ecstatic
experiences, all of them arising as secret manifestations called joys and
sorrows. If you cling to them and reify them, you will stray into error, and
you will not attain liberation. Due to misery and discomfort and pain in the
life force in the heart, people sigh and feel like weeping, and everything they
see and feel seems to be of the nature of suffering. Then they restlessly yearn
to escape somewhere where there will be no human intruders, and when they come
to such a place of solitude, they yearn for companionship and moving around.
[439] Overcome by desires and cravings, they find they cannot remain in
solitude, and they scramble after anything that will bring them pleasure. That
is falling into error, so recognize this!
Frightened by suffering, your body, speech, and mind become agitated, impelling
you to become active, and that is a great mistake. Some people become depressed
at the miserable pain in the life force in their hearts, and out of despair
when they wander from one village to another, this seems to help. Then when
they come around to their own homeland and so on, before many days have passed,
uneasiness arises again just as it did before, and they wish to be on the move
again. Such people wind up squandering their whole lives.
Some people's minds are filled with doubt and vacillation, doubting that they
can ever come to certainty , and they waste their lives by repeatedly traveling
to many lands. Some are carried away by viewing their teacher's counsel as
being wrong, and they fall into false views. Others take their own meditative
practice to be harmful, and they constantly feel regret and wonder what to do.
They think that if they were to go to some other famous spiritual teacher, that
might help. [440] Nowadays there is not a single spiritual teacher who is well
versed in the nature of this path, the manner in which meditative experiences
arise, and so forth. Thus, fearing that their reputation will decline,
Page 306
they cannot admit they do not know and are not familiar with those things. Some
of them teach things that are their own mental fabrications, then tell others
that their meditation is wrong. Others say, "Your guru doesn't know how to
teach, so you have been proceeding on a false path. Do this instead..."
Teaching that their own level of instruction is all you need, they heap praise
upon it. There are a great many who pompously declare that they can transfer
their realization to others, saying, "I shall grant you my realization, our
minds will merge, and you will simultaneously perfect all grounds and paths."
If that were possible, the buddhas would have transferred their state of
realization to sentient beings, and samsara would already be empty.
Specifically, if the minds of all the buddhas' sravaka and pratyekabuddha
disciples received the buddhas' realizations by having their minds merged with
the buddhas', why would they be drawn far beyond the Hinayana? [441] Do not
place credence in pretentious assertions about transferring one's realization.
Some people think they have no craving for the eight mundane concerns. Others
who have not developed their minds in the slightest become obsessed with
various visions they experience. Those spiritually blind people never
critically examine the way they wander about in delusion, then claim they have
reached the state of the extinction into reality-itself and think their own
delusions have vanished. Accomplished scholars scorn such attitudes and
demolish them with their weapons of scriptural authority and logic. So
individuals who enter this path should be careful in this regard.
Even if you succeed in other Dharma practices, you will not achieve the highest
state of liberation in this very lifetime. Consequently, maras will not be
jealous or angry, so they will not create obstacles for you. If you do come to
the culmination of this path, you may achieve liberation in one lifetime and
with one body. In this case the might of the terrifying Lord of Maras is
dredged up, the
Page 307
maras are aroused to jealousy and aggression toward those advancing towards the
state of spiritual awakening, and they are sent out to create obstacles. They
then create problems and manifest objective apparitions to lead people astray.
[442]
By practicing single-pointedly, without succumbing to such obstacles, the
appearances of light increase, and as soon as you settle in meditative
equipoise, all appearances become totally pervaded by light and bindus, with no
intervals between them. Ordinary phenomena that appear due to looking at impure
phenomena with the eyes, are seen with the eyes of the flesh. The appearances
of the absolute nature, of bindus, or of [vajra-] strands arise simply by
attending to the visions of light. They are derivative of the manifestation of
wisdom, so they are said to be seen with the eye of wisdom. During meditative
equipoise, the displays of the absolute nature and of bindus increase,
stabilize, and become continuous, and they are said to be illuminated by the
eye of primordial wisdom.
The consciousness that manifests the visions of the clear light during the
initial phase is called the eye of wisdom. Wherever the eye of primordial
wisdom, free of dust, is directed, it illuminates whatever it sees until the
visions of the absolute nature, the bindus, clear light, and divine embodiments
are seen. Then due to the sharp pinnacle of primordial wisdom, free of
fluctuations in the clarity of the eye of wisdom, [443] all appearance, both
while in meditative equipoise and otherwise, transform into displays of light
and rainbow bindus with ever increasing clarity. In the end, appearances of
earth and rock vanish and dissolve into continuous, omnipresent displays of
visions of light. That is the criterion for have acquainted oneself with this
practice. Impurities have been transformed into the vital core, and the vital
core has been transformed into the five lights, and they become manifest. That
is the criterion for perfecting the power of progress in meditative experience.
At this juncture, the larger bindus cover the
Page 308
sky and earth, while the smaller ones variously appear as small as grains of
mustard, and they appear in aggregates of five. Within the visions of the
absolute nature appear the doors, roof, Dharma wheel, crowning parasol, strings
of bells, and silk hangings of a palace.
Individuals who embark on such a profound, swift path, who have the fortune of
combining their karma and prayers, will experience the spherical images of the
first phase even at the time of death. At that time, they will expire in the
nature of nirmanakayas. Finally, once the power [of their progress] has been
perfected and nothing appears other than the fivefold aggregates of bindus,
they will be liberated as sambhogakayas, without experiencing the intermediate
state.
To present this in terms of the grounds and paths, when you come to the state
called progress in meditative experience on the path of the Leap-Over, [444]
that is identified with the fifth ground of the sutra path called Difficult to
Practice. These meditative experiences are unbearably painful, and under their
influence one experiences craving and confusion. Therefore, when one comes to
this stage, since it is very difficult to follow the path to its culmination,
this is called Difficult to Practice. On the mantra path all the appearances of
birth and death in samsara are cut off, and one does not perish. This is the
achievement of the state of a vidyadhara who has mastery over life itself.
Then the appearances of reaching consummate awareness, in which awareness
matures into its vital essence, are as follows. The upper portions of the
divine embodiments appear in the midst of all the fivefold aggregates of
bindus, while the lower portions of their bodies appear in forms of clouds of
light. One half of their bodies appears as if it were separated. At that time,
by practicing continuously, eventually entire divine embodiments will appear.
The white, solitary embodiment, replete with the ornaments of a sambhogakaya is
Page 309
Vairocana; the blue embodiment is Vajrasattva; the yellow embodiment is
Ratnasambhava; the red embodiment is Amitabha; and the green embodiment is
Amoghasiddhi. By continuing in constant practice, the embodiments eventually
appear in the form of male and female deities in union; and they arise together
with their entourages of the four male and female bodhisattvas. [445]
As a result of further, continuous practice, assemblies of the five buddha
classes appear in spacious, vast palaces, beautifully adorned with all manner
of ornaments, clothed in various silks, blazing with rays of light, and adorned
with bindus and minute spheres. By familiarizing oneself with that more and
more, volcanic mansions appear that are inwardly constructed of three tiers of
skulls, while outwardly appearing as palaces. In their midst are mandalas of
ferocious blood-drinkers. The deities and consorts are embraced in union, and
single male deities appear dressed in fresh elephant skins, tied with belts of
human skin, with lower garments of tiger skins, each bearing weapons. They
appear in all sizes from the larger ones as vast as the sky, and the smaller
ones as tiny as peas. The entire universe appears to be filled and totally
pervaded with rainbow light and blazing fire. Objects as small as the head of a
pin are filled and illuminated with divine embodiments with all their
ornaments. That marks the perfection of the potency of reaching consummate
awareness.
The mark of one's speech at this point is that one's voice is soothing and
enchanting, like songs sung by the children of kumbhandhas. [ 446] In addition,
various words of Dharma, legends, and knowledge of linguistics, poetry, and
composition naturally emerge. Appearances arise as symbols and as scriptures,
and the meaning of all oral transmissions and practical instructions flows
forth like the current of a river. Words of melodious songs and so on inspire
others' perceptions of the world, and their minds are blessed.
Page 310
The bodily signs are that your body vividly appears as mudras of the five
buddha-classes, like the appearance of a reflection in a space of limpidity and
luminosity, like a mirror-image. The body appears as a variety of reflections,
as light as cotton, with no sense of materiality. As an indication that bodily
parasites have been released into the clear light, it becomes free of lice and
nits. White hair turns dark, bright white new teeth grow in, and your muscles
become youthfully strong, and wrinkles clear away. The perceptions of others
shift simply by laying eyes on you, and they experience faith and reverence.
With the blazing forth of the warmth of primordial wisdom, all thoughts of
clothing are discarded, there is no longer any sense of being cold, and you
experience continual blissful warmth. [447] Casting off all thoughts of food,
you can live for months and years on the food of samadhi, the power of bliss
and emptiness. In each pore of your body are displayed unimaginable kinds of
abodes of sentient beings as well as buddha-fields. That indicates the
achievement of mastery of miraculous emanations. With your mastery of
incarnation and emanation, you manifest an inconceivable number of emanations
in an unimaginable range of abodes of sentient beings, and in a single instant
you guide an inconceivable number of sentient beings. You manifest an
inconceivable number of emanations in an unimaginable number of buddha-fieds,
where you make myriads of offerings, receive empowerments, and open up an
inconceivable number of avenues of samadhi. Such transformations are displayed
in your own and others' fields of experience, and you send forth and disclose
unimaginable emanations and miraculous displays. Due to your pristine
perception, appearances arise as displays of buddha-fields, and due to the
pristine purity of the mind-itself, the universe arises as a display of divine
embodiments. Due to the pristine purity of your voice, sounds arise as wheels
of Dharma. Pure
Page 311
appearances pervasively arise as displays of those three pristine purities,
[448] without even a speck of impure appearances.
Once the union has been mastered, the many avenues of the impure cycle of
existence are purified, and can be united with the great bliss of the absolute
nature. Once liberation has been mastered, simply by focusing your awareness
you can bring to a state of liberation even someone who has committed the five
deeds of immediate retribution. Once you reach mastery over the elements, you
can transform all things into gold, silver, and so on; and phenomena are
mastered such that you can transform water into fire, fire into water, and so
forth. Once you have mastered the ayatanas76 of the five generic emblems, you
can transform your body into the five elements, have your body take on the
shape of other creatures, and manifest yourself in various emanated forms. Once
you have mastered all stages of birth, dying, and aging, when you want to
transcend the three worlds, you will become awakened in the absolute nature of
the dharmakaya, Samantabhadra. This occasion is called awakening in the great
openness above, without reliance upon any of the virtues, vices, causes, or
effects of all your lifetimes. Without reliance upon the qualities of your
karma or the appearances of the intermediate state, all mental states and
appearance naturally awaken by themselves, like the dawn breaking in the sky,
and there is no death. [449]
Reaching the state of consummate awareness on the path of the Great Perfection
means that you implicitly attain what is called the eighth ground on the sutra
path, and you also implicitly achieve the state of what is called a Mahamudra
vidyadhara on the path of generation. Moreover, due to the
_______________
76 These ayatanas presumably refer to the five 'signs,' (Tib. mtshan ma, Skt.
nimitta) that eventually arise due to meditating on the generic emblems of the
five elements of earth, water, fire, air, and space. These practices are
discussed in B. Alan Wallace, The Bridge of Quiescence: Experiencing Tibetan
Buddhist Meditation (Chicago: Open Court, 1998) in the chapter "Quiescence in
Theravada Buddhism."
Page 312
inconceivable differences among people's metabolisms and faculties, there is a
corresponding, inconceivable array of meditative experiences. Thus, they are
not uniform and there are no definite criteria for them. The foregoing
descriptions are simply metaphorical and symbolic. You must examine this with
awareness and ascertain that all appearances are of the nature of meditative
experience. So recognize this!
O Vidyavajra, by practicing in that way, enthusiastic, courageous individuals
do not need to be concerned with such issues as the acuity of their faculties,
the quality of their karma, or their age, as is the case on other paths. They
are said to be of superior faculties solely due to their enthusiasm and
courage. Therefore, when those who integrate Dharma with their lives, without
becoming frustrated in their meditative practice, experience the outer and
inner appearances of reaching consummate awareness, without confusing one for
the other, [450] all phenomena will appear only as lustrous light, and no
ordinary appearances will ever arise again.
Finally, like a full moon, the appearances of all embodiments and bindus
gradually decrease in number. From your brain77 a white mass of light, like a
billowing cloud emerges in the space in front of you. In its midst appears an
aggregate of five bindus, in the center of which appears Vairocana with his
consort, adorned with sambhogakaya ornaments, and surrounded by four similar
deities in union. Above, below, and all around those divine embodiments, vajra
strands arise in the forms of dangling lattices and half-lattices, like
rosaries of clear crystals. Then blankets of light, white like the moon, emerge
from the hearts of those embodiments and penetrate down into the point between
your eyebrows. For seven or five days those blankets of light appear as
ornamental bindus stacked up like upside-down conch bowls. Finally, they
dissolve into the
_______________
77 The Tibetan term here (dung khang) literally means "conch abode," but it
refers to the brain.
Page 313
point between your eyebrows, transforming your body into a mass of light. You
thereby receive the immutable body-vajra empowerment.
At this point, even if you die, with no intermediate state, you will experience
the central buddha-field called Ghanavyuha and achieve stability. [451] There
the entire ground is composed of precious crystals. It is so vast and all-
pervasively immense that it rivals the dimensions of space itself. Its surface
is smooth and even, like the face of a mirror. When you step down, it gives
way, and when you lift up, it rebounds. As the soles of your feet touch the
surface of the ground, the primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness blazes
forth. Clouds of delicious aromas spread forth from hills covered with
medicinal plants, and the whole ground is completely covered with brilliant
lotuses of various colors. The sky is criss-crossed with lattice patterns of
rainbow-colored light, and forms of rainbow canopies, parasols, victory
banners, and pennants appear in it. It is surrounded all around by a great moat
of water bearing the eight excellent qualities, and on its shores are pebbles
of various precious substances, turquoise meadows, and golden sand. All around
inside them are immense, majestic, lightly filled forests of wish-fulfilling
trees. In the groves around its ponds are flocks of birds that are emanations
of buddhas, white like the color of conch, yellow like gold, [452] red like
coral, green like emerald, and blue like lapis-lazuli, as well as other colors
such as black, tan, and variegated. Their beautiful forms are pleasing to
behold, and their lovely voices proclaim words of the sublime Dharma, as they
circle around the ocean and alight on the wish-fulfilling trees. In the rivers
are innumerable, lovely, enchantingly beautiful goddesses emanated by daughters
of the devas, nagas, gandharvas, and kinnaras, who are constantly making clouds
of offerings and rendering service.
In the center of that buddha-field is a square palace with doors on each of its
four sides, produced by the natural appearance of primordial wisdom. Its east
Page 314
side is composed of crystal, its south side is composed of gold, its west side
is composed of ruby, and its north side is composed of emerald. Its roof is of
lapis lazuli, and its exterior and interior are spacious and luminous. Its
whole floor inside is made of precious rainbow crystals. When the light of the
sun and moon streams through its windows, the floor becomes covered with
rainbow light and bindus. Jewel lattices and half-lattices hang from its walls,
and parasols, victory banners, [453] pennants, and silk ribbons flutter in the
wind, giving rise to words of the sublime Dharma, which are heard by herds of
lovely deer. This vast, spacious palace is beautifully adorned with thresholds,
Dharma wheels, and top ornaments of the sun and moon. It is exquisitely
designed and is replete with all ornaments.
In its center, adorned with rainbows and a mass of light is a broad, high,
jeweled throne supported by eight lions. On its lotus, sun, and moon seat is
the Bhagavan Vairocana, adorned with all the sambhogakaya ornaments, of the
nature of the purified aggregate of form, the embodiment of the primordial
wisdom of the absolute nature of reality. He is surrounded by an immeasurable
assembly of bodhisattvas on the tenth ground, and he is constantly turning the
wheel of Dharma. Recognize the importance of occasionally bringing that buddha-
field to mind even while you are still on the path.
O Vidyavajra, when you who are following this path finally go beyond that
stage, red-colored light emerges from your throat [454] spreading into the sky
in front of you. In the midst of that light a fivefold aggregate of bindus
arises, in the center of which appears Amitabha with his consort surrounded by
the four male and female bodhisattvas. Between them are red vajra-strands in
patterns of lattices and half-lattices, like rubies strung together. From the
hearts of those divine embodiments rays of red light appear which strike your
throat in the form of a string of bindus, like inverted ruby bowls, and stack
there. They
Page 315
appear to dissolve into your throat for twenty-one, seven, or five days. You
thereby receive the secret vajra empowerment of unceasing speech, and you
achieve confidence.
At this time, there is a discontinuity, a shift of appearances, and in an
instant the entire ground, vast and spacious, is composed of rubies. When you
step down, it gives way, and when you lift up, it rebounds. The whole ground is
completely covered with brilliant lotuses with blossoms of various colors. The
whole environment in all directions is completely surrounded by inconceivable
buddha-fields. [455] There are naturally arising ambrosial ponds with jewel
pebbles, golden sands, turquoise meadows, wish-fulfilling trees, ambrosial
springs, rainbow canopies, and various parasols, victory banners, and pennants.
Unimaginable offering goddesses are constantly making offerings and rendering
service, and in the center of all this is a palace composed of rubies. Its
inner walls are white on the east, yellow on the south, red on the west, and
green on the north. Its roof is blue and blazes with blue light, and it is
adorned with all ornaments and fine attributes. In its center, is a lotus, sun,
and moon seat upon a jeweled throne supported by eight peacocks. On it sits the
Bhagavan Amitabha, red in color, adorned with all the sambhogakaya ornaments
and garments, of the nature of the purified aggregate of recognition, the
embodiment of the primordial wisdom of discernment. He is turning the wheel of
Dharma for an immeasurable congregation of bodhisattvas on the tenth ground.
You are instantly transported into their midst, you stabilize there, and
achieve confidence in this state. [456]
Then when you move beyond that point, blue light emerges from your heart into
the space in front of you like a billowing cloud, and in its midst arises a
five-fold aggregate of vast, spacious blue bindus. In their center is the
principal deity Aksobhya with his consort surrounded by the four male and
female
Page 316
bodhisattvas. Adorned with all manner of ornaments, lattices and half- lattices
of blue vajra-strands arise in the spaces between them like garlands of
vairata. From the hearts of those divine embodiments blue light billows forth,
penetrating down into your own heart, where bindus stack up in a column like
inverted lapis-lazuli bowls. They appear to dissolve into your heart for ten
days or longer. You thereby receive the wisdom-gnosis empowerment of the
undeluded enlightened mind, and you achieve confidence.
Even if there is an interruption at this time, with no intermediate state, your
appearances will shift, and you will experience the southern buddha-field of
Abhirati, as vast as the absolute nature itself. Its surface is smooth and
limpid, like the face of a mirror. Its color is blue like lapis-lazuli and it
is criss-crossed with lattice patterns of rainbow light. Verdant hills of
medicinal plants are beautifully adorned with various flowers, wish-fulfilling
trees, lakes of water bearing the eight fine attributes, golden sands,
turquoise meadows, jewel pebbles, and unimaginable goddesses making offerings,
singing praise, and rendering service.
In the midst of the sky and intervening space adorned with all manner of lovely
ornaments is a square palace with four doors. Its exterior is blue in color
like lapis-lazuli and blazes with light. Its interior is radiant and luminous
with the colors of the five primordial wisdoms. In its center is a jeweled
throne supported by eight elephants. Upon it is a lotus, sun, and moon seat on
which sits the dark blue Bhagavan Aksobhya, adorned with all the sambhogakaya
ornaments, of the nature of the purified aggregate of consciousness, the
embodiment of mirror like primordial wisdom. One hand touches the earth, while
the other is in the mudra of meditative equipoise. Around him is assembled an
innumerable Sangha of bodhisattvas, who are listening to the Dharma from the
Teacher while
Page 317
bowing their heads in respect. As your appearances shift to this, you will
attain liberation. [458]
When you move beyond that point, yellow light emerges from your navel into the
space in front of you like a billowing cloud. Immediately, the whole ground
becomes luminous with yellow light like the color of gold, and all other
phenomena arise as displays of yellow light. In the midst of that mass of light
a five-fold aggregate of large bindus arises like a round shield, and in its
center is Ratnasambhava with his consort, surrounded by the four male and
female bodhisattvas. Lattices and half-lattices of blue vajra-strands arise in
the spaces between them like garlands of amber. From the hearts of those divine
embodiments yellow light billows forth, penetrating down into your own navel.
In that continuum of light bindus appear to stack up in a column like inverted
golden bowls for five or seven days; and finally, they dissolve into you. You
thereby receive the primordial wisdom vajra empowerment, free of signs and
words, in which all excellent qualities are perfected.
Even if there is an interruption at this time, with no intermediate state, your
appearances will shift, [459] and you will experience the precious buddha-
field of Srimat, as vast as the absolute nature itself, in which the whole
ground is like the color of refined gold. Its surface is smooth and even. It is
filled with grassy hills of medicinal plants blanketed with various flowers,
ambrosial ponds, purifying springs, and a myriad of clouds of offerings of such
things as wish fulfilling trees. In its center is a palace emanated by
primordial wisdom. Its exterior is like the color of precious gold, and its
interior bears the colors of the four kinds of activities from the natural
potency of the five primordial wisdoms. In its center is a jeweled throne
supported by eight supreme horses. Upon it is a lotus, sun, and moon seat on
which sits the Bhagavan Ratnasambhava, whose body is adorned with the signs and
symbols of enlightenment and with all the
Page 318
sambhogakaya ornaments, of the nature of the purified aggregate of feeling, the
embodiment of the primordial wisdom of equality. He is surrounded by an
immeasurable Sangha of bodhisattvas to whom he is constantly revealing the
Dharma. With the emergence of these appearances, you will achieve liberation.
When you move beyond that point, your body appears as five lights, and from it
emerges a mass of dark green light into the space in front of you. [460] In its
midst appears a five-fold aggregate of five-colored bindus of light, like a
rhinoceros-skin shield. In it is the principal deity Amoghasiddhi with his
consort, surrounded by the four male and female bodhisattvas. The images of
their bodies are limpid, they are replete with all manner of ornaments, and
blaze with a magnificent mass of light. Everywhere above and below them vajra-
strands appear in the forms of lattices and half-lattices, like turquoise
garlands. As for the upward and downward extensions, from the hearts of those
divine embodiments green light billows forth, like the color of emerald,
penetrating your genital region. In that continuum of light bindus appear to
form in a column like inverted turquoise bowls for ten days or so; and when
they are complete, they appear to dissolve into you. You thereby receive an
empowerment that grants you mastery over the spontaneously present divine
embodiments and displays of primordial wisdom.
At this time, even if your appearances shift, you will experience the buddha-
field of Karmaprapurana, in which the whole ground blazes like the color of
emerald. The entire environment is replete with all manner of ornaments and
fine characteristics, and in its center is a palace, bearing all wonderful
qualities. Its exterior is green like the color of emerald, and its interior is
of the clear, luminous colors of the four kinds of activities from the natural
potency of the five primordial wisdoms. [461] In its center is a jeweled throne
supported by eight pheasants. Upon it is a lotus, sun, and moon seat on which
sits the
Page 319
Bhagavan Amoghasiddhi, whose body, green in color, is adorned with all the
sambhogakaya ornaments, of the nature of the purified aggregate of
compositional factors, the embodiment of the primordial wisdom of
accomplishment. He is surrounded by an immeasurable assembly of bodhisattvas on
the tenth ground for whom he is constantly turning the wheel of Dharma. As your
appearances shift to this, you will achieve liberation.
When you receive the vajra-empowerment of spontaneous, original perfection and
you go beyond the final purification of the visions of meditative experience,
all the mandalas of the blood-drinking deities in the skull mansions appear to
you. Rising up into the sky above, you let out a terrifying roar and appear to
dance in various ways, causing all realms of the universe to tremble and shake,
the great earth quakes with a great roar. Consequently, the entire animate and
inanimate universe dissolves into the nature of light, and, with a wave of your
hand, your own body disappears into the realm of light.
At this time, you will achieve the four great confidences of fearlessness.
[462] What are those four? Due to arriving at the ground of your own being, the
dharmakaya, the nature of the original protector, the primordial buddha, even
if you have a vision of buddhas filling the whole of space, you achieve the
great confidence in which there is not the slightest bit of faith or reverence
for them. By coming to spiritual awakening within yourself, in which you can be
neither benefited or harmed by any other causes or effects, you achieve the
great confidence in which there are no hopes for the ripening of effects from
their causes. By coming to the ground of your own being, which is originally
free of birth, cessation, and abiding, even if you are surrounded by a thousand
assassins bent on murdering you, you achieve the great confidence that is
devoid of even the slightest trace of fear. By experiencing the state of the
originally pure, primordial protector, and coming to the state that is
originally free of delusion,
Page 320
you achieve the great confidence in which there is no anxiety concerning
samsara or the miserable states of existence.
Then the appearances of the absolute nature, the bindus, the divine
embodiments, and the buddha-fields gradually vanish like the full moon waning
to the point that it disappears into the moonless sky. Finally, awareness is
awakened as the ground, and you come to the nature of the dharmakaya. The
fundamental root of self-grasping is destroyed, and the mind of grasping is
extinguished. [463] The ray of dualistic grasping is severed, thereby
extinguishing apprehended objects. Conceptualization involving dualistic
appearances is extinguished, so you expand into the even, pervasive nature of
the equal purity of samsara and nirvana. Your body becomes like a corpse left
on a charnel ground, so no fear arises even if you are surrounded by a thousand
assassins. Your speech becomes like an echo, reverberating back all the sounds
of others. Like a rainbow dissolving into the sky, your mind expands into
reality-itself, free of conceptual elaboration, a great, all-pervasive state
beyond all dimensions.
O Vidyavajra, an individual who has extinguished the appearances of all
phenomena into the absolute nature of reality-itself has far exceeded the tenth
ground of the sutra path known as the Cloud of Dharma. Such a one has
implicitly reached the supreme ground of a spontaneously present vidyadhara on
the mantra path. Still the most subtle of latent cognitive obscurations arise,
and like the illumination from a flash of lightning in the sky, on occasion
your body appears, for just the duration of a hand-wave, as a body of light in
an expanse of light. Recognize that appearances and the mind occassionally
separate, and speech and words of Dharma are sometimes uttered as they were
previously. When this phase is completed from ten days to ten months, [464] the
most subtle of cognitive obscurations vanish into the absolute nature. This
perfects the
Page 321
power of primordial wisdom of knowing reality as it is, and you gain mastery of
the originally pure ground, the primordial dharmakaya. By perfecting the power
of the primordial wisdom of seeing the full range of reality, you gain mastery
over the spontaneously present divine embodiments and the displays of
primordial wisdom. As the originally pure youthful vase body, you are
transformed into a totally perfected buddha, and you become all-pervasive.
Those having superior faculties are liberated as a great transference
embodiment, extending infinitely into the all-pervasive dharmakaya, like water
merging with water, or space merging with space. Those having medium faculties
attain buddhahood as a great rainbow body, like a rainbow vanishing into the
sky. When the ground clear light arises, for those having inferior faculties
the colors of the rainbow spread forth from the absolute nature, and their
material bodies decrease in size until finally they vanish as rainbow bodies,
leaving not even a trace of their aggregates behind. That is called the small
rainbow body. When the ground clear light arises, the material bodies of some
people decrease in size for up to seven days, then finally only the residue of
their hair and nails is left behind. The dissolution of the body into minute
particles is called the small transference. [465] For those of superior
faculties this dissolution of the body into minute particles may occur even
during the Breakthrough.
O Vidyavajra and the rest of you assembled disciples,
Listen and consider this.
These are the superior qualities
Of the spontaneously present youthful vase body.
The obscurations of ignorance are dispelled in the absolute nature;
Ascending to the dharmakaya, beyond the total-ground,
Page 322
Lustrous primordial wisdom manifests,
And it transcends lustrous clarity.
The primordial wisdom of seeing the full range of reality manifests,
And primordial wisdom transcends the mind.
Natural spiritual awakening within yourself
Surpasses traveling to buddha-fields.
Free of all the extremes of conceptual elaboration,
It transcends causality of dependent origination.
Imbued with the eight freedoms,78
It transcends all actions and their effects.
The absolute nature and primordial wisdom are equally pervasive,
Transcending mundane existence.
Perfectly complete buddhahood,
Imbued with nine surpassing greatnesses
Is praised by all the jinas."
_______________
78 (1) The freedom of the formed observation of form, (2) the freedom of the
formless observation of form, (3) the freedom of beauty, (4) the freedom of
limitless space, (5) the freedom of limitless consciousness, (6) the freedom of
nothingness, (7) the freedom of the peak of mundane existence, and (8) the
freedom of cessation. (Tsepak Rigzin, Tibetan-English Dictionary of Buddhist
Terminology (Dharamsala, India: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1986) p.
236.
Page 323
The Questions of the Entire Assembly
Then the entire assembly of disciples, including Vidyavajra, asked, "O Teacher,
Bhagavan, [466] due to the barbarous nature of sentient beings in this era
afflicted by the five dregs, some people, owing to their poverty, waste their
lives in the pursuit of food and wealth. Some succumb to distractions and
spiritual sloth and their lives are wasted in that way. Others, while seeking
to subdue their enemies and care for their families, spend their whole lives
constantly in the pursuit of profit and notoriety. Some people get caught up in
activities pertaining to the eight mundane concerns and fall under the spell of
the bounties of mundane existence. Others are overcome by maras and obstacles,
so their meditations veer off into ordinary mental states. Due to the paucity
of conducive circumstances and the abundance of unfavorable circumstances,
there are very few who reach the state of liberation. If they are not
liberated, they must proceed into the intermediate state, so may the Teacher
precisely explain the essentials of practice in that state!"
The Teacher replied, "O Vidyavajra and you other assembled disciples, listen!
The essential nature of that which is called the intermediate state is simply
this ordinary, limpid, clear, fresh, unstructured, and uncontaminated
consciousness of the present. Why? [467] Due to failing to realize this, one is
made to wander endlessly in samsara, and due to realizing it, one is brought to
nirvana. This very consciousness is liberated in the three times, so it does
not become awakened, as it is not liberated, it does not wander in the cycle of
existence. Rather, it remains in an in ethically neutral transitional process,
and that is the defining characteristic of sentient beings.
The emergence of sentient beings out of ignorance of the ground is like the
sun. The emergence of conceptual mental processes from the mind is like the
Page 324
rays of the sun. The emergence of appearances from mental processes is like the
light of the sun. The manifestation of the limpid and clear essential nature of
the mind is just like the eyes. As for the etymology of the mind, this term
refers to the mentation that takes place due to appearances. Thus, the ground
of the mind naturally arises as the essential nature of the transitional
processes.
As for the etymology of transitional process, this term refers to the arising
of unstable, delusive, dream-like appearances in the interval after a prior
state of existence and before a later state of existence occurs. This is the
classification of the transitional processes:
   1. the grasping transitional process of living
   2. the contemplative transitional process of meditative stabilization
   3. the delusive transitional process of dreams
   4. the gradual transitional process of dying
   5. the inconceivable transitional process of reality-itself [468]
   6. the karmic transitional process of becoming
First, the transitional process of living is like a little' bird on a treetop,
for you cannot remain for long before having to proceed to another world.
Having pondered the nature of this process, the attitude of preparing to remain
in this world for a long time regresses. Then, like a bee in pursuit of nectar,
you first clear out mistaken notions by means of hearing and pondering the
Dharma; and when you are practicing, you must cut off uncertainties and
hesitation as if you were a swallow entering its nest. Among birds, the swallow
is especially skilled at inspection. When it first builds its nest, it
carefully observes for a long time whether or not there might be disturbance or
harm from other creatures; then after this is determined, it builds its nest.
Once its nest is built, from then on it
Page 325
goes straight to its nest like an arrow, without any uncertainty or hesitation.
Likewise, by devoting yourself to a qualified master and by acquiring broad
learning and deep understanding, you should be able to proceed to the essential
points of the path by your own power, without error. First gain sound
understanding of the view, meditation, experiential realizations, and the
nature of the grounds and paths, and comprehend them through your own
experience. Eventually [469] you will never be separated from the awareness
that the appearances of this life are like dreams and illusions; and like
someone shopping in a market, you will unsatiatingly practice with zeal and
great courage. Like a traveler from a distant land who has achieved his great
goal and when setting out on the road does not lose it to enemies or thieves,
do not succumb to activities involving the eight mundane concerns, such as the
great obstacles of entertainment, distractions, subduing your enemies, and
caring for your loved ones. Adhering to that crucial point is the sublime
quintessence for all Dharma practitioners, so be aware of it!
By practicing in that way, those of superior faculties attain spiritual
awakening as a great transference embodiment of the rainbow body, without
reliance upon death or their full life span. Those of medium faculties are
liberated during the dying process, with no intermediate state, in the nature
of reality-itself. Those of inferior faculties merge the mother and child clear
light in the intermediate state and attain liberation.
It is important that you occasionally train in the path of transference in the
following way:
AH. Imagine a white syllable A on the crown of your head.
Immeasurable masses of light emanate from it:
In the actual, self-appearing, great, buddha-field of Akanista,
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
