


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 251
just that which transforms into the objects of all appearances. You may
identify unceasing cognition, this whirring consciousness, as being of the
essential nature of meditation. However, since this ethically neutral
consciousness of cognition is the basis of samsara, even if you achieve
stability in that, this will lead you to the two higher realms of existence and
not higher. So cognition does not transform into wisdom.
Since cognition [358] does not turn into wisdom, all positive and negative
karmas are directed solely to samsara, and they never become causes for
liberation. Thus, recognize the importance of not becoming absorbed in that.
This is a disaster for all those meditators who remain solely in this state,
without ever transcending it. From this arise the errors stemming from the
nature of all meditative experiences of vividness, from the nature of all
ethically neutral states, and from various, miscellaneous extrasensory
perceptions of seeing appearances as gods and demons. All those who take this
alone as being the path will be endlessly deluded in samsara, and they are not
even moving in the direction of liberation and omniscience.
Wisdom is a subsequent knowledge that establishes everything included in the
phenomenal world of samsara and nirvana as being empty, identityless, and
nonobjective. That is called the wisdom that realizes identitylessness with
respect to that which is always unreal and empty. Due to that powerful method,
all appearances and mental states are gradually extinguished in the absolute
nature, just as the whole earth is saturated by the moisture of the ocean.
The emergence in one's mind-stream of the great wisdom that realizes
identitylessness, like salt being saturated by water, [359] calms all appearing
phenomena in the ocean of the original ground. The emergence in one's mind
stream of the wisdom that realizes identitylessness, like ice being saturated
with warmth, calms all subjective and objective phenomena in the original,
primordial
Page 252
ground, the absolute nature. The emergence in one's mind-stream of the wisdom
that realizes identitylessness, like camphor saturated by the wind,
extinguishes samsara in the great wind of reversion.63 In the mind of a person
in whom the wisdom that realizes identitylessness has arisen all appearances do
seem to exist, but in the depths of that person's mind they are known to be
like illusions and dreams, so they are dismissed as being identityless. For a
person in whom the wisdom that realizes identitylessness has arisen, whatever
may be craved or grasped, deep down, one has reached the depths of
identitylessness. In the mind of a person in whom the wisdom that realizes
identitylessness has arisen, all the basic roots of samsara will disintegrate.
Thus, the wisdom that realizes identitylessness ascertains samsara and nirvana
as great emptiness. The great wisdom that experiences reality knows how all the
qualities of the path and the fruition are perfected. [360] Great, omnipresent,
all-seeing wisdom experiences the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as
the ground. The wisdom that knows reality as it is knows reality-itself, the
mode of existence of suchness. The wisdom that sees the full range of phenomena
perceives the basic roots of all the phenomena of samsara, and it sees and
experiences all the inexhaustible ornamental wheels of the bodies, speech,
minds, qualities, and enlightened activities of the jinas and jinaputras of the
three times. In reality, when one fathoms the vastness and depth of the great
wisdom that realizes identitylessness, this is nothing other than a natural
expression of the essential nature [of awareness].
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between consciousness and
primordial wisdom, you may identify consciousness as primordial wisdom, and
consequently wander in circles of delusion. So learn
_______________
63 The analogy here is of a wind that reverses the natural sequence of the
cycle of existence as characterized by the twelve links of dependent
origination.
Page 253
how to distinguish between them! Consciousness is the naturally present
limpidity and clarity of the unceasing objects that emerge in the expanse of
cognition, which, when they enter the sense-doors, are bound by self-grasping.
By looking outwards from the sense-doors, that which appears as seeing,
hearing, feeling, experiencing, and contacting external sensory appearances is
called consciousness. [361] Insofar as that individually apprehends and knows
labels and things, and causes the closely held three feelings of pleasure,
pain, and indifference, all things appear to be separate and distinct, they are
given individual labels, and things are apprehended as being distinct. That
acts as the basis from which emerge thoughts of attachment to one's own side
and aversion to the other's side. The good is apprehended as being good, and it
is made into an object of hope, thus proliferating thoughts of yearning. The
bad is apprehended as being bad, and that serves as a basis from which various
thoughts of anxiety arise.
That which is called cognition manifests as consciousness of appearances, it
turns into appearing objects, and it causes appearances to be made manifest.
From the very moment that a thought and a subject arise, that which is called
mind merges nondually with appearances and vanishes. Primordial wisdom is the
potency of ground, and it is expressed as the five primordial wisdoms.
Specifically, in the manifest state of the ground, great primordial wisdom,
which has been forever present, abides as the aspect of limpidity and clarity ,
like the dawn breaking and the sun rising. It is not a blankness that knows
nothing, like an unceasing darkness. [362] All appearances are naturally
present and do not arise or cease. Just as heat is naturally present in the
nature of fire, moisture is present in the nature of water, and coolness is
present in the nature of the wind, due to the unceasing power in the nature of
primordial wisdom, there is total knowledge and total awareness of all
phenomena, without its ever merging with
Page 254
or entering into objects. Primordial wisdom is self-arisen, naturally clear,
free of outer and inner obscuration, and it is the all-pervasive, limpid, clear
infinity of space, free of contamination.
What are the causes and conditions by which consciousness is transformed into
primordial wisdom? Accurately knowing how thoughts of the phenomena of samsara
and nirvana emerge, including the eight collections of consciousness and
sensory appearances, and realizing the manner in which they are naturally
perfect as displays of the embodiments and primordial wisdoms in the nature of
reality-itself. Then from the time that one identifies the dharmakaya, the
awareness that is present as the ground, consciousness is transformed into a
display of primordial wisdom. Thus, as for consciousness, solely due to the
apparitions of self-concepts, primordial wisdom takes on the guise of
consciousness, like a pile of stones being mistaken for a man. As for
transforming that into primordial wisdom, [363] like recognizing a pile of
stones for what it is instead of seeing it as a man, the correct realization of
the mode of being of consciousness transforms it into primordial wisdom. It is
not that consciousness must vanish into the absolute nature and primordial
wisdom must arise from somewhere else. But know that it seems that way due to
the functions of self-grasping and identitylessness.
Due to consciousness, the first [moment of] knowledge emerges in the aspect of
the object, just as various images of planets and stars emerge in the ocean.
That which arises is closely held by conceptual consciousness, it is bound by
reification, and one becomes deluded. Realizing the reasons for that brings one
to primordial wisdom.
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between the total ground
and the dharmakaya, you may take the total ground and the total-ground
Page 255
consciousness as the path, in which case you will not transcend the three
realms. Why? The actual total ground is something immaterial, thinking nothing,
a space-like vacuity and blankness in which appearances are impeded. Know that
you come to that state in deep, dreamless sleep, when you faint, and when you
are dying. [364] As a result of engaging in conceptual negation and
affirmation, the total ground is aroused, and if someone takes that as sublime
meditation and stabilizes it, know that he may become demented, stupid, and
totally ignorant. There are some teachers who identify that as the great,
intellect-transcending extinction into reality-itself. If you get stuck there,
it is certain that you will be cast into existence in the realm of gods who are
devoid of discernment.64
Someone with an experience of emptiness and luminosity who directs his
attention inwards may bring a stop to all external appearances and come to a
state in which he believes there are no appearances and no thoughts. This
experience of brilliance from which one dares not part is the total ground
consciousness. This is aroused by the power of being bound by the fetters of
meditation, but some teachers identify it as the clear light. Others think it
is awareness of non-meditation, and yet others identify it as the insertion of
the vital energies and mind into the central channel. In reality, it is the
total ground consciousness, so if you get stuck there, you will be cast into
the formless realm, without coming even a bit closer to the state of
liberation. The total ground and the total ground consciousness observe one's
own mind, [365] but they do not recognize or know samsara and nirvana as one's
own appearances.
The dharmakaya is spontaneously present in the essential nature of the pure
equality of samsara and nirvana; it is emptiness, the infinity of space; its
displays are groundless and rootless; it is the great unobstructed
nonobjectivity. The primordial wisdoms and excellent qualities of the buddhas
do not enhance it; the
_______________
64 This is included in the formless realm.
Page 256
terrible evils, obscurations, and miseries of sentient beings do not impair it.
Not becoming good or bad, it is the great, immutable, originally pure, all-
pervasive, ground absolute nature. Once its mode of existence is established,
identifying its manifest state within oneself is simply holding one's own
ground. It is very deluded to think that the dharmakaya did not exist
previously and that it is newly coming into existence.
The realm in which the absolute nature of the dharmakaya manifests is nondual
with space. All the phenomena included in samsara and nirvana are naturally
present in the emptiness of reality-itself, the absolute nature that is free of
the extremes of conceptual elaboration. It is called the embodiment of the
totality of all primordial wisdoms and qualities as perfect, spontaneously
present displays. Thoroughly fathoming the mode of being of this dharmakaya,
Samantabhadra, is realization. By experiencing that state, one knows that just
as all the reflections of the stars and planets in the ocean are displays of
the ocean itself, [366] and just as the entire animate and inanimate universe
is a display of one space, all of samsara and nirvana is a display of the one
dharmakaya. That is the great plenitude of the dharmakaya.
Just as the reflections of the planets and stars in the ocean are bound by the
ocean, and just as the entire animate and inanimate universe is bound by space,
so are samsara, nirvana, and the path all bound by the one dharmakaya.
Experiencing that reality, dwelling in it, entering the womb of the nature of
existence, coming to the nature of being within yourself, and ascertaining this
to be free of good and bad and all benefit and harm is the experience of
realization by which one gains confidence, and that is spiritual awakening.
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between that which is and
is not the path, there is the danger that you may succumb to that which is
Page 257
not the path, and unfortunately not experience the genuine path; so learn how
to distinguish between them! Correctly realizing the view, the essential point
of emptiness, and simply taking that knowledge as the path is the path of the
perfection of wisdom. Once you have realized the meaning of great emptiness,
you will know the nature of the entirety of samsara, nirvana, and the path, and
you will experience the absolute nature. That is called awareness of the Great
Perfection. [367] The limpid, clear ground, free of contamination is taken as
the path. If you take consciousness as the path, you are taking the aspects [of
consciousness] as the path. If you take the ground displays of the pure
equality of samsara and nirvana as the path, that is taking the essential
nature as the path, and that is called the authentic path.
That which is not the path is called viewing ideation with ideation. With
respect to ideation, you may engage in such evaluations as denying and
affirming, adopting the good and rejecting the bad, and finally regard merely
unstructured consciousness as the ultimate view and meditation. But that is not
the path. Even if you take the creative expressions of consciousness and the
essential nature of consciousness as the path, since the mind is the basis of
delusion, you will certainly not ascend beyond the three realms. So that is not
the path.
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between mastering the
ground and succumbing to the ethically neutral, you will mistakenly fall under
the influence of the ethically neutral, and you will remain as deluded as you
were before. Why? In the absence of a label, there is no basis for the
appearance of the label. In the absence of a phenomenon, there is no basis for
the appearance of the phenomenon. In the absence of benefit or harm, there no
basis for the appearance of benefit and harm. In the absence of samsara and
Page 258
nirvana, there is no basis for the appearance of samsara and nirvana. In the
absence of sensory objects, there is no [368] basis for the appearance of
sensory objects. You may establish that all such bases are non-existent and
know them to be non-existent. But if you regard the objects of those bases of
appearances to be obliterated, you have succumbed to a nihilistic view; and if
not even the bases of appearances and their objects were to exist, there would
be no referents of appearances. Realizing the clear, empty nature, free of
conceptual elaboration, of the bases of appearances and their objects is
mastering the ground. That ground is present in the mind-streams of all
sentient beings, but it is tightly constricted by dualistic grasping; it is
regarded as external firm and solid things. This is like water in its natural,
fluid state freezing in a cold wind. It is due to dualistic grasping onto
subjects and objects that the ground, which is naturally free, becomes frozen
into appearances of things. Thus, meditators--however puffed up they may be--
who do not even know how dualistic grasping operates reduce the ground to
something ethically neutral. So, however much they may meditate, they will not
become spiritually awakened.
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between delusion and
liberation, you will go astray by mistaking delusion for liberation, such that
you will not attain the great state of liberation. It is like this. There are
three types of delusion: the delusion in one's mind-stream, delusions regarding
the path, and the delusion of going astray. [369]
The delusion in one's mind-stream refers to the minds of all sentient beings
being deluded by the ignorance of dualistic grasping, which prevents them from
seeing the entrance to the path.
There are many kinds of delusion regarding the path. Specifically, one may
spend one's whole life observing and modifying ideation, which causes one
Page 259
to hold closely to various joys and sorrows. Some who do that become so deluded
that they become delirious, like an irrigation canal that becomes blocked and
overflows with swirling water. Some are deluded by taking a soothing sense of
well-being as the best of meditations. Others fixate on a sense of luminosity
and deludedly take that to be the most sublime of meditations. Some people
cling to various obsessions with divine and demonic apparitions stemming from
their experience of luminosity. They proceed to teach this to others, holding
themselves to be supreme, and they waste their lives in the pursuit of material
gain, driven by arrogance and conceit. Even if they meditate, it is for that
purpose; and even if others try to correct them, they do not believe them, and
they cannot turn away from the path they are treading. Others take
nonconceptuality and a blank sense of emptiness to be the foremost of
meditations; and, becoming absorbed in that, they spin around in a cycle of
delusion. Yet others, due to their ignorance of the view, [370] devote their
entire lives to the mere empty luminosity of consciousness, and they are said
to be deluded with respect to the path.
As for the delusion of going astray, before some people come to the culmination
of the path, they take meditative experiences and views and meditations with
objective referents as the pinnacle of meditation, and they get stuck there.
They then face death as ordinary people, and they suffer the delusion of having
gone astray.
That is also called becoming deluded in error. Why? First one establishes the
emptiness of all phenomena included in the universe of samsara and nirvana, and
after recognizing that, one thinks, "I have realized samsara and nirvana as
great emptiness, so now I don't need to engage in the conventional Dharma of
accumulating merit, nor do I need to meditate," and one proclaims these empty
words to others. There are many such people who then waste their entire lives
Page 260
due to distractions and spiritual sloth, and they face death as ordinary
people. Others, after they have similarly recognized the nature of emptiness,
think, "Now there is nothing whatsoever for me to practice," and they proclaim
the superiority of their view. After misleading others with rituals and
liturgies, when they die, they are caught by the ripening of their karma, and
they step into the abyss of the miserable states of existence. That is a
mistake. Some become satisfied just by hearing about and understanding
emptiness, [371] and they discard all practices of meditation as if they were
clots of spittle. Maintaining that there is no need to guard their samayas or
precepts, even if they were to have a direct vision of the Buddha, they would
be snared by false views and misconceptions, without even a trace of faith or
reverence. As for their involvement in negative actions, they would experience
no qualms even about the urge to kill a human being; if they felt the need to
eat their father's flesh, they would do so as if it were ambrosia; they take
delight in material wealth acquired by cheating others; they partake of
nonvirtue as if it were medicine, and they reject virtue as if it were poison.
Due to such negative actions, as they train in emptiness, they are like people
who run into a plant poisonous to the touch while seeking life-sustaining
medicine. If it becomes a cause for such negative actions, emptiness is reduced
to a demonic meditation, and in this life one is deluded as a mara and a
malevolent rudra.
Generally speaking, once you have realized emptiness, if all accumulations of
meritorious, virtuous karma are nonexistent and unnecessary, all nonvirtuous
karma, material acquisitions, attachments, hatreds, and cravings should
likewise be abandoned. However, if you reject all deeds of virtue and vice, and
passively dwell in the state of emptiness, you bold guys may possibly be doing
just fine; [372] but if you reject virtue and pursue nonvirtue, don't you see
that your mind-streams become demonic and diabolical?
Page 261
If you recognize that with respect to emptiness virtue and vice do not exist,
lie down and rest on a bed with no virtue or vice! If you are right in your
knowledge that virtue does not exist and in your refusal to engage in virtue,
there is no point in engaging in vice either. So release yourself in
nonactivity and remain there! If you know that vice does not exist, what is the
point of doing it? Thinking that vice does not exist, if the pursuit of vicious
behavior is emptiness, then since all sentient beings have just such an
attitude and conduct, they should all have realized emptiness. Do you get it?
Do you understand that people who engage in vice and nonvirtue and the
nonvirtuous deeds themselves are in the pit of nonexistence? If you truly
realize the view of emptiness, you will see all acts of virtue and vice as
being like children's games, so what is the point of pursuing them? In that
way, once you have seen all appearances to be like illusions and dreams, if you
completely release yourself into inactivity, just that is the conduct of
emptiness. However, upon ascertaining the nonexistence of virtue, someone may
develop false views regarding the Dharma, and, with the understanding that
vices do not exist, continuously engage in nonvirtuous behavior. In the end,
the lords of hell will rise from the pit of nonexistence [373] and terribly
punish that person for a long time. When he is endlessly tormented in the great
dungeon of misery, what will he do then?
If you say there are benefits to virtue in this lifetime, but add that it does
not truly exist or you dismiss it with indifference; or if you say there are
disadvantages to sin, but you really do not take it seriously and hold to wrong
views, when you finally die, you will remember its drawbacks and you will
tremble with fear. All possessions and friends you have accumulated will be
left behind, you will be terrified of the agents of the Lord of Death, and out
of unbearable fear at the miseries of hell, your eyes will fill with tears. How
tragic it will be when you claw at your chest and cannot avoid going to hell!
At that time
Page 262
it is too late to feel regret and too late to recall the drawbacks [of evil],
so what is of benefit now? Do you understand that you are going into battle
after sacrificing the depths of emptiness?
Without succumbing to such delusion and false paths, know that realizing
emptiness and practicing until you reach the grounds and paths of liberation is
of the utmost importance. Having simply identified awareness, some people lack
even a trace of any meditation and claim they have [374] experienced the
extinction into reality-itself and there is nothing more to spiritual awakening
than this. That is an enormous mistake! The qualities of realization mature
through the power of gradual practice. This is how you must reach the state of
liberation: (1) the inexpressible state during all meditation sessions that
occurs due to the power of first identifying awareness and practicing single-
pointedly is called the awareness of identification; (2) next, by the power of
earnest meditative practice, from the time you get up in the morning until you
fall asleep at night, you never waver even for an instant from that state of
awareness, and that is called the awareness of the expanse; (3) finally, by the
power of ardent meditation, awareness uninterruptedly gains confidence within
itself, and that is called the contemplation of the river's current or the
awareness of gaining confidence.
Again, by the power of incessant meditation, thoughts of self-grasping turn
into empty awareness, and the ground of samara is empty. The clinging of
dualistic grasping is immediately released, and the appearances of yourself and
others vanish into the absolute nature. All hatred for your enemies, attachment
to your friends, hope for the good, fear of the bad, [375] obsession with
wealth, and craving for the five sensory objects vanish into the absolute
nature. You dwell, like space, without activity in the infinite expanse of
reality-itself, and that is certain liberation.
Page 263
If someone says, "I have been extinguished into reality-itself," since such
words and thoughts are of the intellect and cognition, this reveals that no
such extinction has occurred. If the appearances of illness arise for such a
person, this indicates that illness and the locus of illness have not been
extinguished. If there are appearances of hunger and thirst and of being warm
and cold, those are indications of self-grasping. If someone says, "Even though
I have no attachment, hatred, or obsessive craving, I act as if I did," such
duplicity of pretending one has something one really doesn't indicates that no
extinction has occurred. There is no reason why one would engage in such
pretense, so that indicates that one has not been released into great,
intellect-transcending reality-itself. Those who seek out and grasp at material
possessions demonstrate that they are not liberated. Even if they maintain that
they are liberated, the fallacy of their assertion is revealed by examining the
signs. Those who say they are liberated whether or not they meditate and who
have not progressed in the slightest [376] beyond all ordinary types of
activity reveal the falsity of their own words, and they become objects of
great derision for the wise who are imbued with virtues.
Meditative visions vanish like mist, without imparting the slightest benefit or
harm. Realization is like space, for it has immutably come to the nature of
reality. Whether or not one is liberated is revealed by examining the signs of
both. The criteria of liberation are to be apprehended by way of one's dreams:
(1) superior people purify their dreams in the clear light and become
thoroughly integrated with it; (2) middling people recognize their dreams as
dreams and are able to engage in various types of emanations and
transformations; (3) inferior people find that they have no more dreams due to
negative habitual propensities, but only good dreams. When sleep arises as the
clear light, one gains confidence in terms of the enlightened awareness of the
dharmakaya. When
Page 264
one gains mastery over the displays of emanation and transformation in one's
dreams, one can transform one's own appearances into displays of the
sambhogakaya. When one has only good dreams, without a single bad one, one is
definitely released as a nirmanakaya. Those are taught as methods for
investigating one's own degree of spiritual maturation.
The state of extinction into reality-itself is one [377] in which all
appearances of things have dissolved into great, intellect-transcending
reality-itself. Thus, one does not mentally engage even for an instant in the
affairs of samsara but remains inactive. This is definite liberation. Strive
diligently in the practice of profound meditation until you meet the criteria
of liberation! Even if you have heard many teachings and know many treatises of
the sutras and tantras, if your mind-stream is not liberated by great
meditative experience, there is not the slightest benefit, and you will have to
continue wandering in the cycle of existence. Thus, liberating your own mind-
stream is the vast treasury of all learning, the great treasure of wisdom and
great primordial wisdom, and the sublimity of all meditation. So recognize the
indispensability of striving in essential practice. Hold fast to it! Rely upon
it! Realize it! If your derive no benefit for your own mind-stream, and focus
on the many implications of the words you have heard, your life will be led in
vain. Moreover, you will have a hard time finding anyone to teach, for you will
just generate powerful pride and conceit in others, making it very difficult
for them to get any benefit. Even if you acquire enormous prestige and
notoriety, this human life is like an episode in a dream and like visiting a
marketplace. [378] Thus, do not be beguiled, for the time of death is coming
and there is no time for pursuing prestige and fame. When their lives are at an
end, some people do not notice the occurrence of portents of death, such as
advanced age, the loss of physical strength, and the decline of their mental
powers; and still they praise themselves thinking, "I am
Page 265
great, I am good." Still attached to the yearning for greatness and prestige,
their craving does not cease. When you analyze this, feel compassion for such
people who do not see the futility of wasting their lives in the pursuit of
status and honor.
Do not rely upon anyone, but entrust yourself to the Three Jewels. Do not cling
to other affairs, but apply yourself to the sublime Dharma. Do not cherish
other hopes, but place all your hopes in the state of liberation. Do not waste
the rest of your life, but enfold it in essential practice. You do not really
achieve fame by working for it, so yearn for the kingdom of the dharmakaya.
Without deceiving yourself, apply yourself to a genuine spiritual practice for
dying. This is the only time you will attain a human life, so make sure that it
is meaningful. Now is the only time you will encounter such profound practical
guidance, so do not throw it away but practice it! Without deceiving yourself,
[379] never forget death. When you go to the next world, you will do so without
friends or relatives, so dispense with conduct for protecting your family! When
you run into death, since you must leave your body and utensils behind, and
since there is no way for your friends and relatives to accompany you, utterly
sever craving and attachment for anything. For those who uphold the lineage,
those are highly cherished, quintessential, practical instructions pointing out
the supreme path for attaining liberation in this lifetime. So put them into
practice! Fuse them inseparably with your mind! If you lack those vital points,
you will not attain liberation in this life, so hold them as the very essence
of practical advice.
O Vidyavajra, if you do not know how to distinguish between buddha and sentient
beings, you may mistake a sentient being for a buddha, and such deluded,
ignorant fools run the risk of wasting their human lives. Why? A
Page 266
buddha is so called due to having cleansed the stains of ignorance in the
absolute nature and to having fully extended all primordial wisdoms and
excellent qualities. Infinitely pervasive like space, [380] such a being is
free of the eight extremes of conceptual elaboration, is endowed with the three
doors of liberation, and is enlightened in the great bliss of equality . The
dharmakaya, being free of signs and labels, is open and unobstructed. Free of
mutation within the three times, it has no fundamental ground.
Apart from that, do not think buddhas have bodies: If you thought so, buddhas
would have to have parents, and would you then not regard them as sentient
beings who have fallen to the extreme of birth? Do not think that buddhas have
a self! If you thought so, would you not regard them as sentient beings bound
by the ignorance of being single individuals? Do not think buddhas have realms
with their inhabitants, called buddha-fields. If you thought so, would you not
regard them as sentient beings bound by dualistic grasping? Do not think
buddhas have eyes! If you thought so, would you not regard them as sentient
beings having visual consciousness? Do not think buddhas have ears! If you
thought so, they would seem to have auditory consciousness together with sound,
[381] and would you not regard them as sentient beings having the same? Do not
think buddhas have noses! If you thought so, would you not regard them as
sentient beings involved in olfactory dualistic grasping? Do not think buddhas
have tongues! If you thought so, would you not regard them as sentient beings
involved in gustatory dualistic grasping? Do not think buddhas have bodies! If
you thought so, would you not regard them as sentient beings involved in
tactile dualistic grasping?
Do not think buddhas arose in the past! If you thought so, would you not regard
them as sentient beings who have fallen to the extreme of death? Do not think
buddhas will arise in the future! If you thought so, would you not regard
Page 267
them as deluded sentient beings who are subject to birth? Do not think buddhas
exist in the present! If you thought they existed somewhere, would you not
regard them as permanent, immutable sentient beings? Do not think of buddhas as
teachers having disciples! If you thought so, would you not regard them as
sentient beings who reify self and others? [382] Do not think buddhas are
favorably or unfavorably influenced by receiving homage, offerings, and
service. If you thought so, would you not regard them as sentient beings with
prejudicial clinging with regards to the good and the bad? Do not think of
buddhas as having individual locations in the east, south, west, north, or
intermediate directions! If you thought so, would you not regard them as
sentient beings with specifiable distinctions?
In short, if any buddhas were like sentient beings, they would come when
beckoned; if they were served as masters, they would be directly seen just as
masters are, and one would have to hope that they would respond as such. But
however we might call upon them and revere them, the fact that not even an atom
comes into existence teaches us and makes us understand something. If buddhas
were established in any of the three times, they would have to be produced by
the intention to actualize themselves, and they would be established by the
power of meditation. In that case, since they would have to first be non-
existent, then freshly established, that would indicate that there would be a
path of intention and an object of meditation. That demonstrates they are not
established in any of the three times.
One called a sentient being is one who grasps and is bound by grasping onto a
personal identity. [383] Grasped objects foster grasping onto the identities of
phenomena. Then obsessive clinging and holding onto them proliferates a
constant stream of ideation, and one is dazed by roaming in cycles of delusion.
Page 268
Finally, by the power of practicing single-pointedly and with great fortitude
in that way, the contaminated psycho-physical aggregates vanish right down to
the level of atoms. Then the complete signs of having manifestly, perfectly
awakened include the occurrence of a roaring sound, earthquakes, being
enveloped in light, and the simultaneous entrance of the sun and moon into the
mouth of Rahula.65 Now the profound, swift path to awakening as a great
transference rainbow body in one life and with one body simultaneously
completes all the collections of merit and knowledge without having to
accumulate great collections of merit for many countless eons. If you do not
know the entrance to the secret short-cut of the Leap-over, it is difficult to
transfer impure mental states and appearances into the absolute nature. So you
should know the practical guidance on forcefully transferring all mental states
and appearances into the absolute nature of the clear light, reality-itself."
[384]
Bodhisattva Vidyavajra then commented, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, due to being
propelled by karmic energies over many eons, there is no guarantee that one
will attain a life in which one has the conscious intention to accumulate
collections [of merit and knowledge] and to dispel obscurations. Therefore,
since all the necessary conditions are assembled right now, may the Teacher
reveal the profound guidance in the swift path of liberation in one life and
with one body!"
He replied, "O Vidyavajra, from beginningless time until now, due to the power
of a great many negative thoughts and deeds you have been propelled through the
endless cycle of existence. On some occasion due to the confluence of having
accumulated good karma and having made fine prayers, you have now attained a
human body and have encountered the Dharma. Therefore, if you do not strive at
this time, it will be difficult for you to attain such a body in the
_______________
65 This refers to an eclipse.
Page 269
future, and it will be difficult for you to master the profound path. With the
continuation of negative karma, constantly engaging with miserable, delusive
appearances, even though you have a little karma from the accumulation of
merit, there is no telling what the results of that will be after many eons.
[385] Thus, you should attain liberation in this very lifetime. So carefully
examine this point and realize it!
To follow the profound, swift path of awakening in this lifetime, these methods
and circumstances must be assembled:
    * directly see your spiritual mentor as a buddha and do not displease him
      even for an instant;
    * apply yourself to meditation, propitiatory practice, offerings, receiving
      empowerments, and merging your mind with that of your mentor;
    * regard you companions as viras and dakinis, and unflaggingly cultivate
      faith and reverence for them, while avoiding all contempt, false views,
      disdain, scorn, ridicule, physical abuse, and deceit as if they were
      poison;
    * regard all sentient beings as your own parents and, out of compassion and
      a spirit of awakening, constantly cultivate the attitude of directing all
      your actions to the service of others;
    * recognize how all the appearances of this life are devoid of essence,
      like dreams and illusions;
    * [think]: "this body of mine in this lifetime is something I have for only
      a few years and months, it is not permanent, and there is no knowing when
      death will come"; [386]
    * [think]: "whatever I do now on behalf of my spouse and relatives, once I
      am dead, no one will remember what I have done for them." As an
      indication of this utter lack of benefit for yourself, just look at the
      way in which you do not recall the kindness of your own parents and other
      ancestors who have cared for you!
Page 270
In short, recognizing that all the affairs of this life are as pointless as
children's games, know that you must take care of yourself. Many people, such
as your parents, relatives, and friends, may tell you, "If you don't strive in
worldly activities, you will go hungry! You will be left out in the cold! And
you will be weak and pitiful! You must apply yourself to worldly activities for
your own sake and for that of your family." Longing for your happiness and
well-being, they are instructing you in methods that will give rise to endless
suffering. Like the blind leading the blind, there are plenty of teachers who
offer bad advice with the best of intentions. However, considering that no one
but a qualified spiritual mentor can instruct you in methods leading to
ultimate, eternal joy, take responsibility for yourself, and recognize the
importance of not taking just anyone's advice.
While accumulating sins for the sake of your parents and family, even though
you wish to accomplish some benefit, [387] consider how this actually casts
both yourself and others into endless miserable states of existence. [Think]:
"Now this body of mine has emerged from my parents flesh and blood, and with
the hope that benefit and happiness for them both may arise from this, I shall
offer them the first fruits of the harvest, and I shall dress them in the best
of garments. As they have brought me up with great affection, if I can now
realize eternal bliss, the omniscience of the state of perfect spiritual
awakening, there will be a great significance to my parents' care of my body.
They will accrue vast merit, I shall repay my parents' kindness, render service
to my spiritual mentor, and something of great significance will be
accomplished for the sake of sentient beings." Recognizing that, entrust your
innermost heart to the Dharma; roam about from one solitary retreat place to
another; be content with mere sustenance, without regard to the quality of your
food; be content merely to
Page 271
have protection from the rain and wind, without regard to the quality of your
habitation; and apply yourself to essential practice.
If you overeat, compulsive ideation will increase, and you will succumb to
spiritual sloth and distractions. If you place a priority on beautiful, fine
clothes, you will fall under the influence of luxuries, and you [388] will want
to show off in public. If you drink alcohol, your mind will become dysfunctional
and as an ordinary meditator you will become befuddled. If you become
infatuated with red, white,66 sweet and rich foods, you will run the danger of
spending your whole life in the pursuit of them, while dispensing with any
thoughts of virtue. Therefore, outwardly have no luxuries; inwardly have no
acquisitions; have no hope in others; and have no thoughts of others giving you
anything. Even if you were to die right now, like a little bird alighting on a
treetop, cling to nothing in the past and have no nostalgia. You must have no
boss above you, no servant beneath you, and no companions at your own level.
There are those who first leave behind their family and homeland and move
abroad, where they take up with women and produce bastards. They live on
earnings from reciting prayers for the dead and for warding off danger. If they
hear even a word of praise, their minds become filled with pride and arrogance,
and puffing up their chests, they praise themselves and abuse others. When they
hear even a word of disparagement, their minds fill with hatred and anger, and
they go looking for a fight. Not even knowing whether they will die right now,
they tell others that they have extrasensory perception. They beat
their gums in proclaiming how high their view is. Like stray dogs, they
frantically cling to their territory. [389] Like demons roving about a village,
they constantly delude themselves with magic rituals. Their lives are wasted in
the pursuit of material acquisitions and eminence and renown as meditators,
and,
_______________
66 Red and white foods refer to meat and dairy products.
Page 272
without devoting themselves to retreat for a year or even a month, when they
meet death, they do so as ordinary beings. The wise do not divulge the faults
of others, but rather disclose their own defects. On the other hand, those who
spend their lives fixed on attachments and aversions, without considering their
own failings, have had their life principle carried away by demons, and their
minds are possessed by maras. So you must reject such evil conduct and
meditate.
While not devoting themselves the slightest bit to their own spiritual
practice, those who disparage and revile others who are applying themselves to
virtue are people who have come under the influence of maras and demons;67 so
they have been divorced from Dharma. Even though they are practicing Dharma,
when many of their friends get together, they become depressed with that and
retreat into solitude with the earnest desire to practice Dharma. When they are
living alone, they wander everywhere, like a calf separated from its mother.
Like a weasel stuffed down a hole in the ground, they cannot stay where they
are; and, like a stray dog in search of food, they restlessly roam about in
town. Attracted to conversation and chitchat, they seek out someone to talk to,
thereby fracturing others' spiritual practice. [390] Due to having many plans,
even though they have identified their own essential nature, they have no
confidence in meditation and think rather of going on pilgrimage. When they are
actually wandering on pilgrimage, they wish they were staying in one place or
else they yearn to be back home. Those unfortunate ones are making nothing of
this life or their future lives. They do not follow the practical advice they
receive. Their hearts are inflamed with jealousy at others' eminence, and,
without considering the exhaustion of their own merit, they revile those who
are meritorious. Having no contentment, with their thoughts filled with all the
_______________
67 Tib. dam sri.
Page 273
things they want and need, they give no thought to their own total inability to
do anything and rather boss the people around them. They have a hard time
exerting themselves enough to tie their own belts and shoelaces, but--without
paying any attention to that--they are not impressed even if others move a
mountain, and they order them to do even more. When they see others wearing
their cast-off clothing and eating their leftovers, they respond with
stinginess, but --without noticing that--even when others give them a mountain
of food and possessions, they are still not satisfied. Such corrupt people are
despised and rejected by everyone, so they have certainly not been engaging in
spiritual practice.
Some people do have thoughts of Dharma, and whenever they have time, [391] they
get caught up in verbal and manual virtues. Taking delight in mimicking others,
people who get carried away by such behavior rack up as many conventional
virtues as they can. But when they encounter a little hardship and hunger and
cold, they abandon those virtues. Such people are cut off from participating in
ultimate Dharma practice. Their strong emotional vacillations are like fleeting
rays of sunlight through the clouds; and their busy frenzy is like a winter
gale. All their companionships are of short duration, and they are rejected by
everyone, so such people invariably forsake the practice, for they are
constitutionally incapable of pursuing it.
People who wish to engage in pristine spiritual practice, who go to strict
masters and try inordinately to please them sacrifice their own autonomy to
someone else. As a result, they run the danger of blocking their own progress
on the path of liberation. It is wrong to cultivate a Dharma relationship with
a spiritual mentor who is temperamental, for such a person is a friend who will
cast you into hell. It is wrong to cultivate a relationship with a spiritual
mentor who has many needs and desires, for there is the danger that you may
lose the
Page 274
life force of your solemn pledges. It is wrong to cultivate a relationship with
a spiritual mentor who is manipulative and who has no regard for the hardships
and emotional well-being of others, [392] for your pledges will degenerate and
you will fall into hell. It is wrong to cultivate a relationship with a
spiritual mentor who is involved in a lot of activities, for you will be cast
into hell due to your inability to serve him effectively. It is wrong to
cultivate a relationship with a spiritual mentor who, out of his own self-
centeredness and desire for notoriety , is enamored with those with high status
and disdains those with low standing, with no regard for the emotional well-
being of his disciples; for you will come to have false views and will then
fall into hell. It is wrong to cultivate a relationship with a spiritual mentor
who has false views, who spends little time in meditation, who applies himself
to the eight concerns of this life, and who lacks the wisdom derived through
learning and reflection; for you will be hampered by not progressing beyond
inferior views.
At the outset, spend a long time examining what others say of a spiritual
mentor and what you observe for yourself. Then, if you rely upon one who is
impeccable and replete with excellent qualities, he will show you the path of
liberation, and you will not succumb to any faults or downfalls. From the time
that you devote yourself to him, do not have any false views about him, even if
he kills a hundred men and a hundred horses in one day. Even if he tells you to
kill, to steal, and to take up with women, if you do not do so without
hesitation, you will fall into Avici hell. Thus, the jinas and jinaputras have
said many times that one should obey the spiritual mentor's instructions. [393]
Relying upon a sublime spiritual mentor in that way and striving in essential
practice for your whole life, without wasting the guidance you have received,
is of the utmost importance. So recognize this!
Page 275
If disciples are not examined, they may become maras for their teacher, which
is like throwing one's practical advice into a river and like giving one's food
and possessions to an enemy. The best of disciples are those in whom the
following qualities are present:
    * disillusion and disgust with the affairs of this life
    * unwavering faith in the Three Jewels
    * great compassion
    * little avarice
    * delight in generosity
    * no jealousy
    * candor
    * courage and fortitude
    * dependability
    * single-mindedness
    * firm resolve
If such disciples are accepted and given guidance, something of great
significance will undoubtedly be accomplished.
If disciples with the following qualities are given practical advice,
eventually they will definitely turn into maras for the teacher:
    * obsession with samsara
    * little faith or reverence
    * duplicity and deceitfulness
    * no compassion
    * great avarice
    * jealousy
    * hatefulness and irritability
    * emotional instability and fickleness
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
