


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 51
[78] Recognize what is there that is truly existent! Likewise, examine the ways
in which they are and are not comparable to dream appearances. See whether or
not there are differences between those two in terms of their duration and
quantity.
There is no way to distinguish between samsara and nirvana apart from the
presence and absence of delusion. If you take dreams to be delusive and untrue,
and waking appearances to be nondelusive and true, do you think you are an
undeluded buddha during the daytime and a deluded sentient being while
dreaming? If so, samsara and nirvana would trade places in a single day, so
there would certainly be no hope for either of them. On the other hand, if you
think they are both deluded, but there is truth and falsity within that
delusion, there would be no reason for distinguishing them as delusive
appearances.
Delusive appearances are so called because something that is not so is taken to
be so. In your dreams do you think, 'This is a dream, and this is delusive,'
making no distinction between truth and falsity?' Is there no hatred for your
enemies, attachment to your friends, hope for the good, or fear of the bad? On
the contrary, if you cling and grasp onto the reality of the good and bad, joy
and sorrow, and all sensory objects during the waking state, [79] and you do
the same with respect to dream appearances, as if they were waking appearances,
then you are deceiving yourself. Presented with misleading appearances and
mental states, you cling onto their reality and deceive yourself. Examine the
way that happens!
O Abhasendra, due to the power of conceptualization there arise appearances of
going in all directions; and due merely to the appearances of taking one step
after another, various types of appearances of form and so on emerge and
simultaneously disappear into the absolute nature. As for mountains and
valleys, homes, and all possessions, the former vanish as the
Page 52
latter arise; but the latter do not arrive, leaving the former behind
somewhere. Know that simply by opening and closing the eyes, all appearances
dissolve into the absolute nature and subsequent ones emerge."
Abhasendra asked, "I think these appearing phenomena right here are none other
than all people, earth, water, and mountains that were present in the past, and
they appear to the openings of the sense faculties. I don't think the later
ones emerged after the earlier ones had disappeared into the absolute nature.
The presentations and nature of all appearing phenomena invariably seem to be
of one taste. What is that nature? [80] May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, it is not so. Do you believe the rainbow that
appeared in the sky earlier and the one that appears today are identical? Do
you think the clouds, mist, thunder, rain, and wind that occurred in the sky
previously are the same as such events today? Do you believe that your body and
all sensory objects in a dream are identical to those during the waking state?
If you believe that, examine where they all are when they are not appearing?
There would not be the slightest distinction in terms of the form, shape,
color, or nature of any of them. Do you believe the people and animals that
appear in the waking state are identical with, and in no way different from,
those in a dream? If you think they are the same, you should recognize the
obvious signs that they are dissimilar. For instance, in the waking state
people may appear to be ill, to be struck by weapons, and to perish; but that
is not so in the dream-state. Although the land may be destroyed and the
mountains crumble in some region, it is different [when dreaming.]
You are deluded by taking all nonexistent, not established, appearing phenomena
[81] to be permanent. In reality they are unestablished, impermanent, and
mutable; and from the very moment they appear, they are
Page 53
empty and nonobjective. Knowledge of that state is the quintessence of all the
tantras, oral transmissions, and practical instructions. So know this!"
Abhasendra then commented, "So all phenomena appear while being nonexistent. If
one ascertains that all appearing phenomena are primordially empty, there is no
point in establishing that, for I think the emptiness of oneself is enough. How
about that? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, the appearances and mental states of all sentient
beings are identityless, nonobjective, and of the nature of emptiness. However,
due to failing to recognize that, they wander endlessly in the three realms of
the cycle of existence, clinging onto true existence. If you establish such
nonexistence as the nature of emptiness, realize it as it is, and cause that
state to become manifest, that is the supreme quintessence of the essential
nature of meditation and the authentic path, and of the teachings, oral
transmissions, and practical instructions of the perfect Buddha. So know this!
[82] If that is not realized, emptiness is reduced to something ethically
neutral, so it is of no benefit or harm. If the nature of emptiness is known,
that is the great wisdom of realizing identitylessness; and that is the
essential nature of all the grounds and paths."
Abhasendra then asked, "Even though all phenomena are really empty, the mere
realization of this doesn't cause them to become nonexistent. So I wonder
whether physical or verbal virtues might surpass that. May the Teacher explain
the meaning of that."
He replied, "Don't think like that. Even if you spent your entire life
practicing conventional virtues such as prostrations and circumambulations with
your body and mere oral recitations with your mouth, how could liberation ever
be achieved? Since you won't become liberated even by such mental virtues as
meditating on a deity, cultivating meditative stabilization, and merely knowing
Page 54
thoughts, why do you get frustrated thinking that liberation won't be attained
simply by knowing emptiness? If you think that, you are obscured by a great
darkness of stupidity and foolishness, and you are blind in terms of the eye of
wisdom with which you investigate the mode of being of all phenomena."
Abhasendra asked, "Nowadays there are some people who engage in meditation [83]
and strive in practice; and some masters who acquire knowledge by looking to
the teachings, tantras, oral transmissions, and practical instructions of the
Jina and by training; and they do not succeed in meditation or realization. One
must know that by oneself. Finally identifying consciousness after experiencing
many levels of happiness and adversity is said to be best. Is that the real
meaning or not? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, the jinas have taught that all phenomena, from form
up to omniscience, are emptiness; and they have taught the characteristics of
all phenomena because contemplatives must know and realize them. The path of
their followers accords with that, so its conformity with all the tantras, oral
transmissions, and practical instructions is a crucial point of the utmost
importance. For beginningless eons, sentient beings have failed to discover the
path by themselves, and they have been deluded by clinging onto the experiences
of a constant stream of joyful and painful appearances. If they still fail to
conform to the teachings, tantras, oral transmissions, and practical
instructions of the jinas, on their own they will not discover the grounds or
paths of liberation. And due to the appearances [84] of pleasant and painful
sensations, the attainment of the state of omniscience is as far-fetched as the
horns of a hare. Know that your speech is very stupid and foolish, and your
words are uncritical, naive, and ignorant."
Abhasendra then asked, "Even though I know that phenomena are empty due to
their nonexistence, anxiety and fear do arise on such occasions as being
Page 55
attacked by others, falling over a cliff, or being assaulted with water, fire,
or weapons; and events such as pain, illness, loss, and regret do happen. So it
seems to me they must exist. Please explain how those occur."
He replied, "O Abhasendra, in such cases when the attacker, you, the weapon,
the object jabbed with a stick, or when water, fire or a cliff appears as a
frightening object, sensations of suffering and pain certainly arise due to
dualistic grasping. But actually there is no loss, and they do not inflict
harm. The fires of hell do not burn, pretas are not tormented by hunger or
thirst, and asuras are not hacked with weapons of war. Likewise, in terms of
appearances all miseries and pains merely appear, but in terms of emptiness
they are not established in anything.
O son of good breeding, the primordial ground appears as space [85] and is then
apprehended as something else. Once space appears as earth, earth is
apprehended as being a real substance. Similarly, space variously appears as
sensory objects such as water, fire, air, and sentient beings; and those
appearances are taken to be real things. As an analogy, various reflections of
the sun, moon, planets, stars, and so on appear in the ocean, but they have no
existence apart from the ocean. Likewise, everything boils down to space
itself."
Abhasendra asked, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, in the nature of pristine space, the
absolute nature of reality, is there any benefit due to virtue, harm inflicted
by sin, or anything benefited by gods or harmed by demons and malevolent
beings? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, where are all the virtues committed with the body,
speech, and mind? Examine the region in which they have been stored and the
manner in which they are gathered. All accumulated virtuous karma has become
nothing, empty, nonobjective, and intangible. As not even one isestablished,
[86] they are nothing but appearances of performing virtue."
Page 56
Abhasendra then asked, "Are they of no benefit to the mind?"
He replied, "Examine where in the mind it might be of benefit: its outside,
inside, front, back, and so forth. If neither that which benefits nor that
which is benefited is established, there is certainly no benefit. Examine also
the direction and location in which all accumulated vices have been assembled,
and observe the manner in which they are located there. They have always been
unestablished and nonabiding, so if you think they have afflicted your mind,
investigate and analyze its exterior, interior, top, bottom, front, back, and
so on. By so doing, you will conclude that they are empty , mere appearances;
and consequently there is not the slightest bit of harm inflicted by them."
Abhasendra responded, "Although there seems to be no benefit or harm, I still
think they exist. Please reveal directly whether that is so."
He replied, "O Abhasendra, if you inspect the mind-streams of an old man who
has devoted his whole life to physical and verbal virtues and of an old man who
has spent his whole life engaging in vice and nonvirtue, you will find [87]
they both want happiness and don't want suffering; they see themselves as gods
and regard others as demons; they have such thoughts as hope for the good and
fear of the bad; and all their desires are parallel, with neither better than
the other. In the past as well, with these thoughts, behavior, and the
direction of their desires, they have been endlessly deluded in the cycle of
existence; and in the future they are bound to be deluded in the same way. So
there is certainly no difference between them."
Abhasendra asked, "With respect to virtuous and sinful conduct, is there no
ripening of karma? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O great being, whatever virtuous or sinful actions have been
committed, a continuous stream of joyful and miserable appearances will occur
until the ripening of each of them has run its course. Then with the exhaustion
of
Page 57
that karma, one participates in other actions and their consequences. Due to
physical and verbal virtues, there is a mere accumulation of temporary merit,
which perpetuates the cycle of existence. But know that they will definitely
not lead to the attainment of eternal joy.
O Abhasendra, [88] in emptiness free of conceptual elaboration there is no
benefit by altruistic gods. Look and you will see there are no fathers,
mothers, causes, contributing conditions, origination, location, departure,
form, shape, or color of so-called gods; and there is no region or direction in
which the gods dwell in the east, south, west, north, above, below, or in any
of the intermediate directions. As there is no place where they dwell or region
in which they are based, they have no form that is seen with the eyes, no
sounds heard with the ears, no odors smelled with the nose, no tastes
experienced with the tongue, and
no tactile sensations felt in the body .So how can they be of benefit?
If you investigate and analyze everywhere in your own home--outside, inside, in
between--and in the front, back, top, bottom, exterior, and interior of your
body, you will see they are not present and are not established anywhere. Look
for gods everywhere in the mountains, orchards, and forests, right down to the
level of particles. From the level of minute particles and partless particles
on up, investigate the abodes of gods and that which dwells there. If gods were
to exist, how could insubstantial gods be of benefit to one who is substantial?
Examine how that which is empty has no ability to benefit that which is empty,
and you will certainly discover that to be nonobjective.
Furthermore, [89] the investigation of malevolent demons is as follows: enemies
are called demons, those objects of fear whom everyone takes to be malevolent.
Whence do they first originate? Are they born from earth or from water, or do
they arise from the air or space? Upon investigation, if you think there are
some origins from which they emerge, reduce those things down to
Page 58
their constituent particles. Check them out after reducing them down to minute
particles and partless particles. No origins are found with such inquiry. If
you think they arise from living beings, inspect and analyze them down to their
elements, sense bases, flesh, blood, bone, and marrow, and you will see they
have no objective existence.
If you still think the consciousness of deluded sentient beings turns into
demons, seek out their location. By inspecting where they might dwell among the
elements of earth, water, fire, and air, you will not find any place where they
dwell. If you still think they exist, what kind of form, shape, color, and
sense bases do those beings have? Examine whether or not there are any forms
that appear in your field of vision, any sounds that appear to your ears, any
odors that appear as olfactory objects, any tastes that appear as gustatory
objects, or any tactile sensations that appear as tactile objects. By so doing,
you will see they have no objective existence. [90] Finally, the investigation
of the locus of moving and the agent who moves reveals that the object and
agent of moving are not established.
Furthermore, if so-called demons were to transcend the objects of form, sound,
smell, taste, and touch, how could they harm one who is substantially existent?
Aggressors are empty and nonobjective, and objects of aggression are empty and
not established; so there is no way for harm to be inflicted upon that which is
empty. If it were possible for empty consciousness to afflict something else,
then the consciousnesses of all sentient beings would be devouring and
destroying each other. Thus, demons are to be understood as not existing by
their own characteristics.
Hence, even though demons are neither seen nor felt, if you think gods and
demons are responsible for the various appearances of joys and miseries that
occur to the body, speech, and mind, then when illness and suffering occur,
Page 59
you should see the wounds from being struck with weapons by those demons; you
should see the swelling and bruises from being beaten by them with sticks and
stones; and if you are afflicted with an internal disease, you should be able
to feel when they reach inside you with their hands. Check carefully to see if
that is so. Happiness arises and is experienced in one's mind-stream due to
different sorts of food, clothing, and sensory objects, and that [91] is not
divine protection. Being pierced by a thorn in the upper or lower portion of
the body, the pain of being hit with a spark, the experience of suffering due
to the heat of the sun, and the suffering of experiencing cold due to air and
wind are not due to attacks by demons. Likewise, when the fruits of bad karma
ripen, all illness, poverty, assaults by enemies, separation from friends,
difficulties, hunger, and thirst arise as miserable experiences due to the
ripening of previous karma. It is crucial that you know with certainty that
there is no objective existence of afflictions or objects of affliction due to
other demons or malevolent beings.
In general, living creatures experience what they have brought upon themselves,
like a spider that catches itself in its own web. Fear of demons fabricated by
old superstitions is like a bird frightened by the sound of its own wings, and
like a deer terrified at the sound of its own footsteps. Know that there are no
other demons.
Generally speaking, one's own appearances arise as demons: since the head
appears as a god, a cap and so on are regarded as clean; and since the lower
part of the body appears as demons, lower garments [92] are regarded as
unclean. In particular, since the feet are taken to be real demons, if anything
touches one's shoes, people mistakenly believe the pollution from that brings
great harm to one's body, speech, and mind. When any foul substance such as
mucus and spittle that flow from inside the body fall upon the ground, people
think of them as being like demons and poison. Look how people with those
Page 60
attitudes take their own appearances to be demons and regard them as their
enemies! Watch how people who wish to make offerings to the gods make sure that
all the offerings are undisturbed for a long time, without anyone eating them
or making use of them. Observe that if people wish to exorcise a pisaca, even
if they bring many possessions with them, those things stay where they are,
without anyone taking them. If people think demons are present in anything from
a needle and thread up to a house or a weapon, and if they engage in such acts
as killing, beating, or pulverizing, why are the demons not killed and
destroyed? There are many people who get rid of clothing, ornaments, tents, and
houses that they have made, built, or erected themselves [93] if they think
demons are present in those images. If you examine and analyze that situation,
you will see it is like a skunk thinking it smells its own odor in its hole and
then abandoning that hole. Know for yourself the fallacy of people fabricating
demons out of their own superstitions.
Abhasendra asked, "Why is it necessary to so investigate the benefit and harm
brought about by virtue and vice and by gods and demons? May the Bhagavan
explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, these are the reasons for so determining the absence
of benefit or harm due to virtue and vice. Emptiness is the path for achieving
the states of liberation and omniscience, but when foolish people who are
attracted to fascinating experiences meditate on profound emptiness, no
fascinating experiences come to mind; so they lose their belief and trust.
Worrying that they may be in danger of wasting their lives by not striving or
creating anything in their minds, they apply themselves assiduously to such
practices as prostrations, circumambulations, offerings, and oral recitations.
[94] Again, due to having the exceptional benefits of this meditation explained
to them, they may think it would be good to try it. Then, although they
meditate a
Page 61
little bit, they understand and experience nothing; so they once again apply
themselves to methods for purifying obscurations and accumulating merit.
Your goal is not accomplished with a vacillating mind, so even if you strive
sporadically like that for a long time, finally you will not escape dying an
ordinary death. Therefore, if you do not know how to distinguish between what
is and what is not Dharma, even if you say you have been introduced to
meditation, the view will remain hidden, and you will have no belief in the
ultimate Dharma. Due to the power of mental activity, all virtues and vices
merely produce the experiential appearances of various joys and sorrows. But
all virtuous and sinful karmas have no form and no substance, and they are
totally not established and nonexistent. Knowledge of that brings about belief
in meditation, and it leads to the conviction that the ground of all virtue and
vice is emptiness. You are obscured by not being aware of your own essential
nature. Due to not knowing and not realizing the ground of great emptiness as
the display of the whole of samsara and nirvana, you wander in the cycle of
existence. Know that merely engaging in physical and verbal virtues does not
purify that obscuration, [95] and believe and trust in your own awareness. By
so doing, the dust will be removed from your eye of wisdom.
If you examine and recognize the benefit and harm due to those gods and demons,
you will see that from the mere establishment of the aggregates grasped as the
I, there comes a constant stream of appearances of the six classes of sentient
beings. Thus, mental grasping and engagements involving meditation, views,
intentional objects, integration, and inner withdrawal constantly manifest
externally as apparitions of gods and demons, internally as physical illnesses,
and secretly as various experiences of joys and sorrows. Falling under the sway
of the superstition of taking them to be demons, and
Page 62
clinging onto that, people turn away from the true path and go astray.
Therefore, it is crucial to determine this.
Moreover, once you enter into the instructions on Severance and practice them,
you establish this fact that gods and demons are none other than your own
appearances. Recognizing the fact that there are no gods and no demons is the
teaching and the main practice of Severance, so this is supremely important. In
the meditation on deities in the stage of generation as well, if you take the
gods and demons to be substantial, [96] you go astray on a path of delusion. So
in that context, too, that is exceedingly important. Furthermore, whatever
spiritual vehicle you may enter, if you fail to recognize these points, and
mistakenly take gods and demons and virtue and vice to exist objectively by
their own characteristics, you will certainly fall into delusion. So ascertain
this as the quintessence of practical guidance and as the essential nature of
the path.
Thus, if you do not recognize how gods and demons are nonexistent, when you
dream of a monk, you may take him to be a parthiva; when you dream of a woman,
you may take her to be a demoness; when you dream of a child, you may take it
to be a theurang; and when you dream of a tadpole, you may take it to be a naga
or a nyan. All those are just delusive appearances that are not established in
truth. And if you dream of acquiring such things as food, livestock, and a
house, the next morning they have vanished out of sight; so they are untrue and
intrinsically empty.
When people go from village to village devoting themselves to religious rituals
and subjugating demons in hopes of acquiring material gain, even though they
try to trick others with various techniques for slaying and subjugating demons,
anxiety and terror of demons arise constantly. Hope in gods arises in the same
way, and one's superstitions manifest as one's enemies. Thus, illnesses and
various joys and sorrows may also constantly occur like that. [97]
Page 63
Therefore, if you know this way in which gods and demons are nonexistent, this
is exceptionally deep, practical guidance for Severance superstition.
If the importance of this is not recognized, you may take even the acquisition
of a needle and thread to be due to divine intervention and propitiate the
gods. And if your hand or foot is pricked with a thorn, you may attribute that
to a pisaca. Then, with the activation of your superstitions, whatever
misfortune occurs, it will seem that it was brought about by demons; and your
mind will be filled with anxiety . Demons are conjured up by ideas about
demons, which turn into devils for life. So the practical instructions on
Severance are extraordinarily profound for turning away from this false path."
Abhasendra then asked, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, with respect to the whole of
samsara and nirvana, are the objects of hope and fear established in their own
characteristics or not? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, the objects of hope called buddhas are originally
unestablished and unpresent. If a buddha had a body, would it have been
produced by the causes and contributing conditions of parents? If so, a buddha
would fall into the extreme of birth. If a buddha had a pure realm, sensory
objects, and a retinue, [98] would they appear due to grasping onto the
phenomenal identities of apprehended objects? If a buddha appeared to have a
body, would that occur due to grasping onto a personal identity? If you believe
buddhas finally pass away into nirvana, do you assert that they fall into the
extreme of death and cessation? If you believe buddhas remain in the meantime,
you are falling into the extreme of substantialism. If you think buddhas reveal
the Dharma to many sentient beings, those things that are apprehended, appear,
and arise as the individuals who reveal the Dharma, as the Dharma that is
revealed, and as the disciples who are taught are all astonishing delusions of
Page 64
dualistic grasping. If you believe buddhas exist like that, you are deluded by
the foggy misconception of regarding buddhas as sentient beings.
Do not think a buddha has eyes. If you were to think that, he would have to
have visual consciousness, inevitably implying the presence of appearances as
form. If that were so, there would have to be objects apprehended by the eyes
and subtle thoughts of taking their configurations to be good, bad, and
neutral. That visual apprehension would be called mind. [99]
Do not think a buddha has ears. If you think so, apprehended objects and the
subtle conceptualization of grasping onto solids would appear simultaneously
with audial consciousness and the appearances of sound; and that would be
grasping. Do not think a buddha has a nose. If you think so, apprehended
objects and the subtle conceptualization of grasping onto odors would appear
with olfactory consciousness and the appearances of odors; and that would be
grasping. Do not think a buddha has a tongue. If you think so, gustatory
consciousness and the appearances of tastes are apprehended objects and the
conceptualization of holding fast to them is called the grasping mind. Do not
think a buddha has a body. If you think so, he would have to have bodily
consciousness and tactile sensations. Just as the presence of water naturally
implies moisture and the presence of fire implies heat, the five doors of the
senses are mirrors of delusion.
Thus, all consciousnesses, appearances, and grasping minds occur spontaneously
as dependently related events. The subtle thoughts holding fast to tactile
objects [100] are tactile grasping, and the three realms of the cycle of
existence are brought into being due to dualistic minds. As for the five
senses, the aspects of limpidity and clarity of the mind unceasingly emerge as
minds and appearances, and they are given different labels. The six collections
of consciousness are called the mind. Those who have a mind are called sentient
Page 65
beings, just as creatures having horns are called horned creatures. Recognize
how important it is not to confuse buddhas with sentient beings in that way.
If you still think buddhas are substantial like sentient beings, seek out the
initial origins of the buddhas and examine where they dwell in the meantime: in
the east, south, west, north, or in some intermediate direction? If you think
they dwell above, and if a world called a buddha- field exists in the sky
without anything to support it, it should fall to the ground. If it were
present on earth, there would be no reason why you couldn't go to there now and
reach it. If it were underground, it would be revealed by digging for it. But
then when you die, why would you be able to come to places that can't be seen
or felt now?
If you suggest that it is not a place that can be reached by corporeal beings,
do you believe that the consciousnesses of all sentient beings who have died
must have arrived at that place? Is it not a place that can be experienced by
those with bad karma? If all those who go from one place to another and all the
places they go [101] arise and occur due to dualistic, deluded minds, then
there is no bad karma other than dualistic grasping. Nevertheless, they are
certainly experienced by everyone.
Moreover, if such places were to exist, sentient beings bound by the two types
of self-grasping and endowed with the five senses, and six collections of
consciousness might go to those places. But due to the impurity of their mind
streams, they could experience only the fruition of temporary pleasure, without
reaching a state of eternal joy. This becomes obvious by observing the
unstable, transitory nature of dualistic appearances. The qualities of
emergence and cessation have never existed in the nature of the appearances of
the dualistic mind. So this indicates their own falsity.
Some people say that an animate and inanimate environment exists in the buddha-
fields, that a plenitude of joy and prosperity is naturally present there,
Page 66
and that whole world, with its Teacher and retinue, has the extraordinarily
fine qualities of serenity, coolness, limpidity, and freedom from impurity. If
so, they are no better than the gods of the form realm, so those are
appearances of sentient beings' minds. The various appearances of that world
are apparitions of ignorance, which shows that this is a limitation of sentient
beings." [102]4
Abhasendra then asked, "There appear to be many deeds, writings, temples, and
reliquaries of numerous contemplatives and siddhas of the past. How is that?"
May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Abhasendra, when someone falls asleep and is dreaming, he may
hear many accounts of the early formation of the cosmos and the evolution of
human and nonhuman life forms. He may witness many teachers and masters
propounding the Dharma, see the images of numerous temples and reliquaries, and
observe an abundance of writings. Many will appear to report that the images of
those temples and reliquaries were constructed by certain patrons, artists, and
smiths, and that those writings were composed by specific teachers. However,
when he wakes up the next moment, it turns out that all those perceived
appearances and reports were nothing but his own appearances emerging from and
disappearing back into his own nature.
Likewise, all the representations of the body, speech, and mind of the buddhas
that appear in this way emerge as appearances of this morning and this present
moment. But they did not exist earlier nor is there any dependence upon
anything prior. Ascertain them all to be delusive self- appearances. Buddha
[103] is just this ground of all sentient beings-emptiness free of conceptual
elaboration.
_______________
4 The above discussion of the buddhas and buddha-fields is not meant to suggest
that they are utterly nonexistent. Rather, those phenomena as sentient beings
conceive of them do not exist objectively, independently of conceptual
designation.
Page 67
That which is called a vision of buddha is Buddha gazing upon sentient beings,
and that is simply a delusive, muddled, experiential vision; for the observer
and the object that is seen do not exist; they are nothing more than intangible
displays of emptiness. Buddha is no more than a self- appearance; so without
placing your hopes in any other object, empty out the object of your hopes!
Now by examining and analyzing the fundamental ground of the domains of the
impure cycle of existence, you must realize that frightening regions do not
exist apart from yourself. Here is the situation. First of all, once you have
cast off this body, if you were to wander to a region called the intermediate
state, investigate: does that exist to the east, south, west, or north of this
spot, or is it right here or in some intermediate direction and so forth? By so
doing, you will see it is not established. If your previous body has been
discarded, check out the parents, origins, location, and demise of the body in
the intermediate state. They should have real characteristics and be truly
existent, but you will recognize the visions of the intermediate state arise as
mere appearances of a dream-body and dream-environment. And the body,
environment, and all sensory objects that appear in this life will be
ascertained as mere transitory appearances without any real characteristics or
true existence. [104]
Do all the hell realms, together with their inhabitants, exist underground or
aboveground? Check out where those worlds exist where you are and to the east,
south, west, and north. Who built the floors of molten iron? Whence was the
firewood gathered? Who forged the weapons of hell? From what parents, causes,
and conditions did the workers in hell originate? If their torsos, legs, and
arms are not burned by fire, why are other sentient beings burned? Those
workers inflict such horrible suffering on sentient beings, so where do they
Page 68
experience the karmic consequences of their deeds? If you investigate this, you
will recognize everything to be like a dream-world of delusive appearances. If
merely wounding and beating sentient beings nowadays results in their death,
why doesn't such suffering of hell kill them as well? If they were to go from
one place to another, we should be able to experientially confirm the existence
of those places now. But why is it that they are not seen except by the
consciousness of the dead? If you investigate that matter, you will know they
do not exist apart from your own appearances. [105]
Likewise, does the world of pretas with their unendurable suffering definitely
exist or not? If that realm substantially exists, check out its location in the
cardinal and intermediate directions, above, below, and so on. If people
nowadays can die as a result of starvation over a period of days or a few
months, why doesn't death result from eons of suffering from hunger and thirst?
If you consider that carefully, you will ascertain that although one has
nothing to eat for beginningless and endless lifetimes, there is a sense of joy
in anticipation of the appearance of food; and pretas experience a sense of
starving, which arises as suffering. Likewise, by meticulously investigating
all the places of origination, remaining, and departing of all the worlds of
the six communities of sentient beings, you will profoundly comprehend that the
appearances of the six classes of sentient beings emerge like dream appearances
that occur when waking appearances are displaced; and those realms are not
substantially existent.
Therefore, once this delusion of self-appearances has dissolved into the
absolute nature, the realm of reality-itself, or suchness, becomes manifest.
[1061 Be certain that effectively striving to realize this from the depths of
your own being is the very nature of the simultaneous perfection of the path,
fruition, and essence of omniscient, perfect spiritual Awakening.
Page 69
Now reality-itself, the sugatagarbha, consists of the basis of emergence and
essential nature of all phenomenal appearances, and it is emptiness. If there
is no essential nature to form, form does not appear; and if there is no
essential nature to sound, smell, taste, touch, and mental objects, none of
them will appear. If there is no essential nature to space, no appearances will
arise in space; and if earth, water, fire, air, and all sentient beings have no
essential nature, ground, or root--if such are absent--they will not appear.
Thus, the essential nature of space is emptiness; and the essential nature of
earth, water, fire, air, form, sound, smell, taste, touch, and all mental
objects is emptiness. Likewise, ascertain that the ground of everything is
nothing more than emptiness, and emptiness is the essential nature.
The essential nature of all the reflections of planets and stars in the ocean
is the ocean itself; [107] the essential nature of the entire universe is
space; the essential nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana is none other
than the mind-itself, the sugatagarbha. That which is called the sugatagarbha
is nowhere else. By counteracting the clinging onto space itself as being
something else, by determining with discerning wisdom that samsara and nirvana
are of the nature of the space of emptiness, and by experiencing the wisdom of
realizing identitylessness, you will ascertain the ground as being space
itself.
If you understand that as an emptiness of materiality, as something ethically
neutral without faults or virtues, know that it is not like that. When sentient
beings are deluded, that is the essential nature of the elements, sensory
objects, and the entire universe--they are all displays of space. Although the
essential nature of the ground is the nature of space, the ground is obscured
by ignorance and is thus taken to be substantially existent. As a consequence
of the identityless nature of pervasive space being apprehended as the self, it
appears
Page 70
as the self. In the process of the ground being apprehended as something
external, space appears as an emptiness of materiality.
Due to the limpid, clear aspect of space, space appears as earth, fire, water,
[1081 air, form, sound, smell, taste, and as tactile objects. That is like the
appearance of various reflections, the planets, and stars due to the limpid and
clear aspect of the ocean. All the reflections, planets, and stars are none
other than the ocean itself, of which they are of the same taste. Likewise, the
whole of samsara and nirvana is none other than space itself, of which they are
of the same taste. Recognizing and ascertaining all of samsara and nirvana as
displays of space is called the is called the wisdom of pristine space. The
manifestation of space is called the primordial wisdom of awareness.5
Abhasendra then asked, "To what does the term awareness refer? May the Teacher
explain!"
He replied, "O son of good breeding, due to the power of ignorance on the part
of all sentient beings throughout the three realms, the mode of being of one's
own pristine space does not manifest. That is called ignorance. Space manifests
by establishing with discerning wisdom all phenomena of samsara and nirvana,
they are ascertained as nothing, empty, intangible, nonobjective, and as
displays of space. That is the great, infinite ground-awareness." [109]
Abhasendra then asked, "Isn't that which is manifest a result of the physical
eyes? That is not true of awareness, so is there or is there not an inner
knower? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "The eyeballs do not see waking appearances, dream appearances, or
appearances following this life. Even a trillion eyeballs would not make form
become manifest. All daytime appearances, nighttime
_______________
5The above passage does not equate space with emptiness, but rather uses space
as a metaphor for the ultimate ground of existence. Space itself is within the
domain of the intellect and is a conventional reality, but its characteristics
are analogous to those of emptiness, so this metaphor is used to bring
disciples closer to a realization of the nature of reality-itself.
Page 71
appearances, and appearances during and following this life are due solely to
the minds of sentient beings, which are clear light in nature, primordially
present, unceasing, limpid, clear consciousness, free of contamination, and
which can make anything appear. It is like this: the stream of consciousness
that establishes, ascertains, and perceives samsara and nirvana. as great
emptiness is called the wisdom that realizes identitylessness. That is of the
nature of the primordial wisdom that comprehends the essence of the great,
infinite ground-awareness,6 the most sublime of all phenomena. [110]
These are its qualities: son of good breeding, just as all darkness is utterly
dispelled with the rising of the sun, simply by establishing the nature of
this, the wisdom that realizes identitylessness utterly dispels all the
darkness of the ignorance of self-concepts; and the nature of being of reality-
itself, or suchness, is made manifest. Just as the explosion of the great
conflagration at the end of the eon disintegrates all gross substances and
utterly annihilates even the tiniest insects, leaving not even a trace of ash,
so does the wisdom that realizes identitylessness overwhelm all recognized
vices and utterly extinguish all unrecognized vices and obscurations.
Great wisdom is like an eye that sees, for it makes manifest all the phenomena
of the path and fruition. Great wisdom is like the water of a great ocean, for
just as all rivers and streams originate from the ocean and return to it, so do
all the phenomena of the path and fruition originate from it and return to it.
Great wisdom is like space, for just as there is nothing in the world that is
not within its domain, in the very instant that all the phenomena included in
samsara and nirvana are perceived with great wisdom, they are encompassed
within it. [111]
_______________
6 When one realizes the essential nature of the ground-consciousness, one
ascertains it to be the ground-awareness referred to in this passage.
Page 72
In one moment sentient beings may be like slaves of Mara, mounds of mental
afflictions, and sacks of poison; and such blind, sinful beings are not objects
of anyone's devotion. But if they identify great wisdom and manifest it, in
that moment they are worthy of homage, devotion, and worship of multitudes of
beings, including the gods; and they become fields for accumulating merit.
Great wisdom is free of all the harshness of mental afflictions, so it is
gentle. Its precious, spontaneous, melodious speech is known to bear the sixty
attributes of the voice of Brahma, so it is melodious.7 It sees the equality of
samsara and nirvana, so it is an eye. It is none other than the absolute nature
that pervades the essence of everything, so it is constant. It uniquely
perceives all phenomena of the ground, path, and fruition as primordial wisdom,
so it sees.8 It releases self-concepts into the absolute nature, so it is
power. It is the source of all might and power, so it is great. It has attained
the great confidence of fearlessness, so it is accomplished.9 As soon as great
wisdom manifests, [112] one transcends mundane existence, so it is noble. It
synthesizes all the types of circles of ornaments of the inexhaustible three
mysteries, so it is of three types. It is the protector of all beings of the
three realms, so it is a protector.10 All of those are none other than great
wisdom.
Great wisdom naturally quells all dualistic grasping onto the appearances of
phenomena into the suchness of reality-itself, so it is presented in peaceful
forms. Snuffing out the life of samsara, and mercilessly bringing one to the
state of nirvana, it is merely said to take on wrathful forms. As soon as this
great
_______________
7 The Tibetan terms for gentle and melodious (or voice) are 'Jam dbyangs,
meaning Manjughosa.
8 The Tibetan terms for eye, constant, and sees are sPyan ras gzigs, meaning
Avalokitesvara.
9 The Tibetan terms, for power, great, and accomplished are mThu chen thob,
Mahasthamaprapta, an epithet of Vajrapani.
10 The Tibetan terms, for noble, three types, and protector are 'Phags pa rigs
gsum mgon po, or Nobles of the Three Types, referring to Manjusri,
Avalokitesvara, and Vajrapani.
Page 73
wisdom that realizes identitylessness manifests, it transforms all mental
afflictions into displays of primordial wisdom.
The firm, resistant delusion of not being aware of one's own essential nature
is called delusion. With the manifestation of the wisdom that realizes
identitylessness, the whole of samsara and nirvana naturally dissolves into
displays of the clear light of reality-itself; so it is the vajra of delusion.
In the realm of the limpid, clear, absolute nature of the ground, free of
contamination, the hatred pertaining to dualistic appearances is naturally
vanquished, so it is the vajra of hatred. In the realm of the great, pure
equality of samsara and nirvana the pride of self-concepts is naturally
vanquished, so it is the vajra of pride. Once the vital energies and mind [113]
have dissolved into the absolute nature of emptiness, the attachment and
craving that arouse thoughts are naturally vanquished, so it is the vajra of
attachment. Due to the sense of the self dissolving into unreality, jealousy
entailing grasping onto signs is naturally vanquished, so it is the vajra of
jealousy. Since the mental afflictions vanquish themselves, it is presented in
wrathful forms. This great wisdom which is replete with all such qualities
makes manifest the primordial wisdom of the dharmakaya, which is present as the
ground."
Abhasendra then commented, "OTeacher, Bhagavan, if there were present in
oneself a buddha who has fundamentally never known or experienced delusion,
whether one recognizes it or not, since it is a buddha, there should be no need
to make wisdom or primordial wisdom evident to it. Moreover, there would be no
reason why sentient beings should wander in the cycle of existence, having to
experience joys and sorrows. May the Teacher explain this point!"
He replied, "O son of good breeding, as a consequence of the ground being
reduced to something ethically neutral, it is of no benefit or harm. Here is an
analogy to illustrate the reduction of fundamental, eternal reality-itself to
Page 74
something ethically neutral. Even if you have a wish-fulfilling gem with you
your whole life, by failing to recognize it and mistaking it for an ordinary
stone, you may be tormented by the miseries of poverty. [114] The gem has not
become powerless, but failing to recognize it, you pay it no heed; and
consequently no siddhis occur.
Never even for an instant have you been separated from the primordially pure
ground, free of conceptual elaboration; but by failing to recognize it, you
have not apprehended your own state for yourself. As a consequence, you have
been deluded by grasping onto the true existence of the constant stream of
joyful and painful appearances. Now great wisdom recognizes manifest,
primordial wisdom; and by apprehending the profundity of your own state, you
are self-liberated. That is like recognizing the gem and treating it with
respect, which relieves you from poverty.
The presence of the ground as something ethically neutral is like an ownerless
field. The independence that ensues from identifying your own essence for
yourself is like sowing a crop in a field and enjoying the harvest. The
ethically neutral ground is like an ownerless, empty castle, which is therefore
of no benefit or harm. The manifestation of the ground is like an owner making
use of his castle. The ethically neutral ground is like the sky obscured by
darkness. The manifestation of the ground is like the sun rising in the
heavens. The ethically neutral ground is an object of delusion for sentient
beings, so it is of no benefit or harm. [ 115] The manifestation of the ground
is mastery over the grounds and paths of liberation. Thus, the manifestation of
all the great qualities of the ground is due to the power of great wisdom."
Abhasendra asked, "Bhagavan, now are the dharmakaya, or awareness that is
present as the ground, and path-awareness different or not? If they are, may
the Teacher explain their essential nature and classifications, the manner in
which
Page 75
excellent qualities are perfected, the way sentient beings become deluded, and
the nature of their being."
He replied, "O great being, there is both path-awareness and ground awareness.
As for path-awareness: once you have identified in yourself primordially
present, unceasing consciousness, you transcend all modes of grasping,
involving analytical constructs, and disappear into your own natural state. By
settling in meditative equipoise in that state, without the three types of
modification, that [consciousness] is an expression of the luster of wisdom or
primordial wisdom, even though it is not actually such wisdom itself. Finally,
by remaining in such meditative equipoise, you see the truth of reality-itself,
and ground-awareness becomes manifest.
As for awareness that is present as the ground: in terms of the labels,
substances, origins, location, and departure of oneself and all appearances,
objects of knowledge are established as being of the nature of ten types.11
[116] Having ascertained all the phenomena included within samsara and nirvana
as being displays of self- appearances alone, the great, all-pervasive realm of
pristine space, which is self-arisen, spontaneous, primordial wisdom, will
become manifest.
Its qualities are these: by not confusing awareness for the mind, there is pure
ethical discipline; by mastering awareness by leaving it as it is, without
activity, there is pure generosity; by awareness apprehending its own state in
itself, there is pure patience; not transgressing the three types of non
modification in meditative equipoise or the three relinquishments during the
post-meditative state is pure zeal; 12 by transforming conceptualization into
_______________
11 The ten types are the ten analogies indicating the illusory nature of all
phenomena. They are: an illusion, a dream, a mirage, a reflection, a city of
gandharvas, an echo, the moon in water, a bubble, an optical illusion, and a
phantom.
12 In meditative equipoise the body, speech, and mind are not to be structured
or modified in any way, and that natural state of those three is not to be
relinquished during the post-meditative state either.
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
