


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 76
primordial wisdom, there is pure meditative stabilization: by displaying
samsara and nirvana in their equality, there is pure wisdom. That is the
spontaneous presence in the essential nature of the six perfections.
By settling in meditative equipoise in great, naturally settled reality-itself,
which is devoid of grasping, without activity, and primordially at great rest,
there is pure meditative equipoise. As a result of one's view, meditation, and
conduct not reverting to the ordinary state, the post-meditative state is pure;
and the essential natures of nondual meditative equipoise and the post-
meditative state are perfected simultaneously.
The contamination of ignorance is cleared out [117} in the absolute nature, and
all the qualities of primordial wisdom naturally arise within the great
primordial wisdom of awareness, where they expand as great spontaneity.13 All
the phenomena included within samsara and nirvana are naturally present,
without modification, in the nature of awareness itself; so that is reality-
itself.14 All virtuous phenomena are desired, without differentiation, in the
self-arisen, great primordial wisdom of awareness; so one speaks of the
Sangha.15 The three kinds of external Jewels are included in one taste in the
nature of awareness, reality-itself; and they are of the essential nature of
the whole of samsara and nirvana; so they are supreme; and that is the mother
who brings all beings to a state of eternal bliss.16 Due to the oath not to
slip out of the state of one's own awareness, one speaks of the chosen deity.17
Because of being like a mother who is pregnant with samsara and nirvana in the
expanse of space, one speaks of space;
_______________
13 The above references to cleared out (Tib. sangs) and expand (Tib. rgyas)
implicitly give an etymology of the Tibetan translation for Buddha, namely
sangs rgyas
14 Reality-itself [Tib. chos nyid] in this context refers to the refuge of the
Dharma (Tib. chos).
15 The above references to virtuous (Tib. dge ba'i) and desired (Tib., 'dun)
implicitly give an etymology of the Tibetan translation for Sangha, namely dge
'dun.
16 The above references to supreme (Tib. bla) and mother (Tib. ma) provide an
etymology for the Tibetan term for guru, namely bla ma.
17 The above reference to oath (Tib. yid la dam bcas pa) provides an etymology
for the Tibetan term for chosen deity, namely yi dam.
Page 77
and because of moving through the many gateways of skillful means and dependent
origination, one speaks of going.18 They are present in the essential nature of
all the objects of refuge of the inner Secret Mantra.
The essential nature, great primordial emptiness, unborn primordial wisdom, is
the dharmakaya. Unceasing primordial wisdom due to the naturally spontaneous,
self-perfected enjoyment of the displays of the embodiments and primordial
wisdom is the sambhogakaya. Great primordial wisdom of all pervasive compassion
arises for the sake of sentient beings, so one speaks of the nirmanakaya.The
secret, unsurpassed Three Jewels [118] are also completely present in the great
primordial wisdom of awareness. Properly recognize the spontaneity in the
essential nature of the synthesis of the Jewels; know that as the sublime
protector of disciples; and devote yourself to that. Not being divorced from
that state is the real taking of refuge in the nature of being. That is the
supreme and foremost of all the ways of taking refuge.
As a means for the Cultivation of the Spirit, this is far superior to other
paths: knowing one's own essential nature as the homogenous, pervasive nature
of being of samsara and nirvana is manifestly the best of all cultivations of
the spirit. In the expanse of awareness, reality-itself, free of conceptual
elaboration, establish the unsought, self-arisen nature of all the circles of
ornaments of the inexhaustible bodies, speech, minds, qualities, and activities
of all the jinas and jinaputras of the three times. Ascertaining that and
practicing it is the essential nature of the synthesis of all sadhanas and
mandalas. That alone is this immutable accomplishment, so recognize it!
If awareness is oath-bound in its own nature, and if you achieve the confidence
of not slipping away from that, you will effortlessly achieve the supreme
siddhi in this lifetime. If you do slip away from that and fall into a state
_______________
18 The above references to space (Tib. mkha') and going (Tib. 'gro) provide an
etymology for the Tibetan term for dakiini, namely mkha' 'gro ma, which is
abbreviated here to mkha' 'gro.
Page 78
of ignorance, the sufferings of samsara and the miserable states of existence
will scorch you like fire. [119] So this is the great samaya. Binding yourself
to the realm of awareness, unconfused with respect to the avenues of deluded
clinging to reality, is the essential nature of all vows.
For beginningless lifetimes, the veil of ignorance has obscured the displays of
the originally pure, absolute nature of the ground. The manifestation of the
face of infinite, sovereign awareness-reality-itself, which transcends
causality-dispels that obscuration into nonobjective, great openness. So that
is the purification of obscurations. However much you strive in contaminated
virtue to benefit the mind with the body and speech, you are merely
accumulating merit within the cycle of existence; but you will not achieve the
state of liberation. Why? Fundamental ignorance is the foundation of samsara
and all delusive appearances and mental states. Thus, none of the virtuous and
nonvirtuous deeds based upon that foundation transcend the cycle of existence."
Abhasendra then asked, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, in that case, if the mind-itself
has always been Buddha, untainted by faults or stains, please explain the whole
of this delusive ground, path, and fruition."
He replied, "O Abhasendra, the pure ground [120] is Awakened as the originally
pure19, primordial Protector. Its manifestation is the self-arisen buddha of
awareness. These are its characteristics: its essential nature is primordial,
great emptiness, the absolute nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana, the
primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality. Mirror-like primordial
wisdom is of a limpid, clear nature free of contamination, which allows for the
unceasing appearances of all manner of objects. The primordial wisdom of
equality is so called, for it equally pervades the nonobjective emptiness of
the
_______________
19 The Tibetan term ka dag also has this connotation: ka refers to the
beginning of time, and dag implies the transcendence over the very concept of a
beginning. Thus, this term implies a transcendence of time altogether.
Page 79
whole of samsara and nirvana. The primordial wisdom of discernment is so
called, for it is an unceasing avenue of illumination of the qualities of
primordial wisdom. The primordial wisdom of accomplishment is so called, for
all pure, free, simultaneously perfected deeds and activities are accomplished
naturally of their own accord. The dharmakaya in which the five primordial
wisdoms are simultaneously perfected is the natural luster of awareness that is
present as the ground. It is known as primordial wisdom that dissolves into
inward luminosity but is not obscured.
Ignorance of its nature is established as the cause of delusion. This is the
way it operates: mere ignorance of the nature of the displays of the all-
pervasive ground acts as the cause. As that becomes somewhat fortified, it is
present as the genuine total-ground, which is immaterial like space, a blank,
unthinking void. Arrival in that state corresponds to being comatose, being in
meditative absorption, [121] arriving in a trance induced by meditative
stabilization, being engulfed by deep sleep in the total-ground in which
appearances have dissolved into the absolute nature, and arriving at the point
of death, in which appearances have shifted. That is called the genuine, total-
ground. Free of mental clinging to experience, one is engulfed in a ground that
is empty of matter.
From that state arises limpid, clear consciousness itself as the basis of the
emergence of appearances; and that is the total-ground consciousness. Moreover,
no objects are established apart from its own clarity, and while it can give
rise to all manner of appearances, it does not enter into any object. It is
like the ability of planets and stars to appear in limpid, clear water; like
the ability of reflections to appear in a limpid, clear mirror; and like the
animate and inanimate world appearing in limpid, clear space. In the same way,
appearances can emerge in the empty, clear, total-ground consciousness.
Page 80
From that state arises the consciousness of the mere appearance of the self
called I. The self is apprehended as being over here, so the ground appears to
be over there, thereby establishing the appearing object of immaterial space.
As that becomes fortified, it is made manifest, and so-called mental cognition
arises, which is the basis for the emergence of appearances; and the aspect of
clarity is revealed. From that arise the five types of appearing objects; and
by holding onto them, there is clinging and delusion. [122]
Thus, obscuring ignorance veils the natural potency of the ground, namely,
self-arisen, inborn, primordial wisdom. As a result, its luster is forcefully
transferred outside. This is how that occurs: with the obscuration of the
primordial wisdom of accomplishment, its luster is transformed into subtle
grasping; with the obscuration of the primordial wisdom of equality, its luster
is transformed into afflicted mental cognition; and with the obscuration of the
primordial wisdom of discernment, its luster is transformed into that which is
called mental cognition.
This is how that luster is transformed from the five absolute natures into the
five great elements and the five derivative elements: in the all-pervasive
realm of the dharmakaya, the potency of the primordial wisdom of accomplishment
is obscured. Consequently, due to the contributing condition of the movement of
karmic energies, a great element occurs inwardly in the nature of the vital
essence of the energies; and that primary cause is transformed into lustrous
green light. As a consequence of grasping onto that as being real and clinging
to it as truly existent, it becomes solid and fully developed; and it occurs
externally as the derivative element appearing as air, in the nature of a
residue.
Likewise, with the obscuration by ignorance of the primordial wisdom of the
absolute nature of reality , its luster appears as the great element of deep
blue colored light. As a consequence of grasping onto that as being real and
clinging
Page 81
onto it as truly existent, the derivative element of space appears. [123] With
the obscuration by ignorance of mirror-like primordial wisdom, its luster
appears as the great element of white light. As a consequence of grasping onto
that as being real and clinging onto it as truly existent, it appears as the
derivative element of water. With the obscuration by ignorance of the
primordial wisdom of equality, its luster appears as the great element of
yellow light. As a consequence of grasping onto that as being real and clinging
onto it as truly existent, it appears as the derivative element of earth. With
the obscuration by ignorance of the primordial wisdom of discernment, its
luster appears as the great element of red light. As a consequence of grasping
onto that as being real and clinging onto it as truly existent, it appears as
the derivative element of fire. In that way, all the elements emerge and
solidify from the five absolute natures. So know this!
The appearance of the formation of the cosmos from the five absolute natures is
as follows: relatively speaking, in the realm of baseless space the mandala of
air is formed as the underlying ground. Upon it forms a serene, clear, pure
ocean, and upon that is the mighty, golden earth. The mandala of fire is said
to be established in their makeup; and it is said that all sentient beings come
into being as something like their essence and vapor. That is said simply to
lead disciples. Ultimately, the subtle grasping which initially [124] obscures
the primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality is of the nature of
air. Thus, as soon as it enters into the fundamental, absolute nature, the
ground appears as baseless emptiness; and that is space. From that, appearances
of space emerge unceasingly.
Subtle grasping sustains the basis of ignorance and obscures the primordial
wisdom of accomplishment. Consequently, appearances of its luster emerge
unceasingly as air. With the obscuration by ignorance of mirror-like
Page 82
primordial wisdom, appearances of its luster emerge unceasingly as water. By
grasping onto the primordial wisdom of equality as being real, its appearances
as earth emerge unceasingly. With the obscuration by ignorance of the
primordial wisdom of discernment, its appearances as fire emerge unceasingly.
From the obscuration of their essential nature, thoughts emerge. From the
obscuration of the primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality,
thoughts of delusion emerge. From the obscuration of mirror-like primordial
wisdom, thoughts of hatred emerge. From the obscuration of the primordial
wisdom of equality, thoughts of pride emerge. From the obscuration of the
primordial wisdom of discernment, thoughts of attachment emerge. From the
obscuration of the primordial wisdom of accomplishment, thoughts of jealousy
arise constantly. All mental afflictions [125] and all kinds of primordial
wisdom are of the same essential nature, but they appear in different ways.
These are indications that all phenomena appear in five ways from one source:
there is water, for water arises from fire; there is air, for air is set into
motion from fire; there is fire, for heat emerges from fire; and there is earth
owing to the arising of minute and partless particles from fire. Likewise,
water arises as the moisture from earth; the nature of air is derived from the
cavities of partless particles of earth; there is fire, for warmth arises from
earth; and the nature of earth is due to the heaviness and solidity of earth.
There is earth, for minute particles come into existence from the cavities of
partless atoms of water; air is due to its power and its agitation in the form
of great waves; due to warmth, the lower regions of water do not freeze; and
the warmth of fire occurs due to the arising of warmth.
Moisture is the defining characteristic of water. Likewise, air is due to its
lightness and motility; there is water, for it is present in the cavities of
partless particles; there is fire, for heat evaporates the moisture of water;
and water is
Page 83
due to the presence of a cold tactile sensation. The essential nature of them
all is space, so all five of the elements are present in each one of them. In
the one reality-itself, the five potencies are all present. Moreover, in each
of the five transformations of potencies into lusters that set of five is
complete, which symbolizes the fact that the nature of one primordial wisdom
[126] appears in different aspects. Space appears as earth; space appears as
fire; space appears as water; space appears as air; and space appears as space.
They all originate from space, so they are known as elements.
The cycle of existence appears from the five aggregates in this way: with the
entry of dualistic appearances into the domain of the primordial wisdom of the
absolute nature of reality, it appears as the aggregate of form; with the
entrenchment of grasping and craving in mirror-like primordial wisdom, there is
the aggregate of consciousness; with the entry of dualistic grasping into the
primordial wisdom of equality, there is the aggregate of feeling; with the
arising of clinging to reality in the primordial wisdom of discernment, there
is the aggregate of recognition; with the entrenchment of clinging to reality
in the primordial wisdom of accomplishment, it arises as the aggregate
compositional factors.
In that way, the five aggregates result from the obscuration of the five
essential natures; the five colors result from the obscuration of the five
potencies; the five elements result from the obscuration of the five absolute
natures; and the five mental afflictions result from the obscuration of the
five primordial wisdoms. In short, the formless realm is a result of the
bondage imposed by grasping onto the realm of the total-ground; the form realm
is a result of the entrenchment of grasping onto the domain of the total ground
consciousness; [127] and by achieving stability in the realm of the mind, one
transmigrates as a god of the desire realm.
Page 84
Due to the emergence of appearances by way of hatred, the phenomena of hell
manifest; due to the emergence of appearances by way of attachment, the
phenomena of the preta realm arise; and due to the emergence of appearances by
way of delusion, phenomena of the animal realm appear. With the accumulation of
a slight bit of virtuous karma mixed with dominant thoughts of jealousy, at the
time of death, that karma is catalyzed by craving and grasping of the same
sort, resulting in the emergence of phenomena of the asura realm. Even though
one has strived in virtues by which merit is accumulated, under the causal
influence of the mental afflictions known as the five poisons and the catalytic
influence of a virtuous mind at the time of death, phenomena of the human realm
emerge. By the power of achieving stability in the virtue of a contaminated,
yet enormously virtuous, mind activated by the ignorance that is the basis of
grasping onto the I, one transmigrates as a deva of the three realms, and those
phenomena emerge. Those are like the emergence of dream appearances.
As for all the daytime and nighttime phenomena among such delusive appearances,
in the domain of the phenomena of the inanimate universe, there are diverse
appearances of its inhabiting sentient beings-which are like its essence and
vapor-with all manner of their forms, shapes, colors, sensory faculties,
languages, species, and so forth. Due to varying degrees of virtue, three modes
of appearances manifest. As for impurities, there are appearances of the pure,
impure, and the neutral. Due to the activation of one's motivation, the
consequences of heavy, light, and medium nonvirtuous actions emerge and are
experienced as all the miseries of the animate and inanimate universe.
In the vast, immense expanse of limpid, clear mental cognition free of
contamination, like space, the six appearing objects emerge by themselves; and
they are differentiated merely with labels. Apart from that, there are simply
no
Page 85
different, self-defining apertures of the senses. Limpid, clear mental
cognition together with the unceasing emergence of objective forms constitute
visually apprehended objects. They are taken to be good, bad, and indifferent;
they are named, apprehended as referents, and with subtle conceptualization
they are viewed as truly existent things. In one's mind that is called visual
apprehension. In reality, subtle and coarse types of mental cognition are
called visual apprehension and visually apprehended objects. Those appearances
are not objects. The planets and stars in the ocean are not the ocean. For just
as there are no stars in the water, appearances are not the mind.20 Just as
there are no stars appearing in the ocean apart from the ocean [129] there are
no appearances apart from the mind. Apart from dependently related events, from
the very time of an appearance it is not established. Ascertaining this is a
crucial point.
Therefore, if you think visual consciousness is form, form would not be other
than visual consciousness; and form and consciousness would be inseparable,
such that no more than one form could ever emerge. Thus, form has no enduring
presence, and from the very moment it appears, it vanishes into the absolute
nature, and reappears in other indeterminate ways. When they transform, that
indicates no change apart from the mere condition of a mindlessness with
respect to the consciousness of the appearing object. For example, by means of
coarse conceptualization, one knows that one is moving. When, due to subtle
conceptualization there is the appearance of taking steps, with each step, the
appearing earth, stones, mountains, caves, fruit-trees, animals and so on
vanish into emptiness as soon as they appear. As they successively emerge, then
vanish into emptiness, that subtle mental consciousness is called grasping.
_______________
20 The essential nature of appearances is the mind; the essential nature of the
mind is awareness; and the essential nature of awareness is reality-itself.
Page 86
Grasping is vital energy, so that is emerging vital energy. Subtle vital energy
transforms things, so that is transformative vital energy. By grasping onto the
self, calling it I, it appears as the body; [130] and with the stable pride of
unceasing appearances and consciousness one grasps onto a basis of appearances
and the mind, so that is grasping vital energy. Within the pervasive ground, it
differentiates everything into objects over there that are far away and close
by and so forth, so it is differentiating vital energy. Thus, since it
dissolves all mental states and appearances into the realm of the vacuous
total-ground, it is called destructive vital energy .Those five, impure,
samsaric vital energies are not different from mental consciousness and subtle
thoughts.
Likewise, whatever objects that emerge as appearances of sounds in the field of
limpid, clear mental cognition are called audial consciousness.21 Coarse mental
consciousness of objects variously emerging as appearances of sounds are called
audial apprehended objects; and conceptual, subtle, mental consciousness that
holds onto sounds is called audial apprehension. Similarly, those objects that
emerge as appearances of smells in the field of limpid, clear mental cognition
are olfactory consciousness. Coarse mental consciousness of objects variously
emerging as appearances of smells are called olfactory apprehended objects; and
conceptual, subtle, mental consciousness that holds onto smells is called the
mind of olfactory apprehension. [131] Likewise, the coarse mental consciousness
that emerges as gustatory objects, that appears as tastes, and constitutes the
objects of emerging tastes is called the apprehended object of gustatory
consciousness; and the subtle, conceptual, mental consciousness that holds onto
good, bad and neutral tastes is called gustatory apprehension. Similarly, the
coarse mental consciousness that emerges as tactile objects is called the
apprehended object of tactile consciousness; and the subtle, conceptual, mental
consciousness that holds
_______________
21 The meaning here is not that objects themselves are consciousness, but
rather that the potency that allows them to appear and be apprehended is
consciousness.
Page 87
onto good, bad, and neutral tactile sensations is merely called the mind of
tactile apprehension.
You must know that there are no appearances other than those consciousnesses,
and consciousness itself is not appearances. If you think consciousness is
appearances, the mind would be dominated by the arising and passing of
appearances, and when they vanished, the mind would also have to vanish. Thus,
appearances are not asserted to be the mind. If you maintain that they are
other than the mind, during the daytime, the nighttime, and the intermediate
state, why do appearances continuously occur to the mind? There would be no
reason why earlier appearances should cease and later appearances should occur.
Therefore, appearances are not the mind. There are no appearances other than
the mind: by ascertaining that no philosophical stance can be established for
actual appearances, one is freed of all philosophical assertions. [132] That is
the meaning of their being not other than the mind.
In that way, when all appearances and mental states arise in their natural
order, the whole of samsara appears; and by reverting from their natural order,
they enter the womb of the total-ground, and they suddenly vanish without the
slightest trace. As for the individual appellation of doors of the senses, they
are so designated when such openings appear where none exist. Due to the I,
appearing objects manifest, conditioned by the appearance of the body; and they
are called the six types of coarse, mental consciousness. From each of the
sense faculties of sentient beings appearances of seeing, hearing, feeling, and
experiencing result in self-deception. Thus, recognize the importance of
knowing how that occurs. The fact that they are not the sense faculties is
indicated by the appearances in a dream and in the intermediate state. Even if
one's eyes are closed or one is blind, forms appear to mental cognition.
Induced by conceptualization, sounds appear to mental cognition. Likewise, the
mere
Page 88
appearances of all smells, tastes, and tactile sensations to the doors of
sensory perception emerge in mental cognition. The fact that the sense doors
are none other than mental cognition is revealed by their very nature.
In general, as for outer phenomena, that which is grasped while grasping onto
the I is a personal identity. External appearances of the inanimate universe,
its internal, animate sentient beings, and all intervening appearances of the
five sensory objects are asserted to be apprehended objects. [133] As for inner
phenomena, afflicted cognition is called an apprehended object, and the mental
cognition that holds onto objects is called apprehension. As for secret
phenomena, mental consciousness is known as the first consciousness. Due to
contributing circumstances, it transforms into the nature of objects known as
apprehended objects. That which labels, grasps the referents of labels,
differentiates, and holds onto all good, bad, and indifferent things is to be
known as the apprehending mind.22
In reality, all the phenomena of samsara and nirvana must be established as
great emptiness. Thus, as a result of recognizing this by investigation and
analysis, great wisdom manifests, and that is called realization.
O Abhasendra, recognize that all phenomena are self-appearing! Wisdom has no
task other than that. Recognize all of samsara and nirvana as great emptiness!
There is no realization apart from consciousness. This is the direct sight of
emptiness. There is no meditation apart from seeing. This very clarity that
makes appearing objects manifest is said to be the mind, which by nature is
clear light. The identification of that is called the self-cognizing clear
light. There is no unprecedented clear light apart from that. [134] There is no
so- called middle way apart from the realization of the great emptiness of
samsara and nirvana. There is no insertion of vital energy and the mind into
the central channel apart
_______________
22 The one Tibetan term 'dzin pa is here translated both as grasping and as
apprehension.
Page 89
from the transference of vital energy and the mind to primordial wisdom in the
great center in which the absolute nature of the ground becomes manifest.
In the past you have grasped onto samsara and nirvana, the animate and
inanimate universe, and all sensory objects as being truly existent, not
knowing the manner in which they are not established. Now, as a result of
knowing that, there is no awareness other than coming to rest in the nature of
reality. There is no so-called Severance apart from the severance of clinging
onto the appearances of the three realms, which brings about Severance to the
absolute nature of identitylessness. This very ground of the three realms,
which is ethically neutral, limpid, and clear, is called Isvara Mahadeva. His
body appears as the desire realm; his speech appears as the form realm; and his
mind appears as the formless realm. The five sensory faculties emerge from the
essential nature of his six types of consciousness. Devas, matrkas, raksasas,
and the eight classes of mattas emerge from the luster of his eight types of
consciousness. The higher classes of gods and demons emerge from the coarse
arrays of his thoughts included among the 84,000 mental afflictions. Vighnas,
pisacas, raksasas, and bhutas emerge from the arrays of subtle thoughts.
Flesh as earth, blood as water, [135] warmth as fire, and breath as air
maintain the body comprised of the four elements. Empty space manifests as the
mind, and embodiments of subtle arrays of thoughts emanate as various forms of
sentient beings. Therefore, the cause of a deity resides in the total ground of
sentient beings. Emptiness is apprehended as form, and form is brought to mind.
In order to refresh one's recollection of it without forgetting it, it is
constantly invoked by name. By repeatedly visualizing many such forms
dissolving from the domain of the five elements, one achieves a little
stability in the visualized objects. By so doing, mental forms will empirically
be actualized in accordance with one's visualization. As a consequence of
grasping onto the true
Page 90
existence of empty space, the empirical actualization of the entire phenomenal
universe is unquestionably an apparition of a single type of grasping.
Actualizing a deity from the realm in which the deity is not established comes
about due to the ignorance of one's own ground acting as the cause of the
entire realm of the deity. Thus, with that very cause the mind presents and
imagines the deity as a form. As a result, it is actualized in no more than two
or three months. If there were some substantial deity apart from that, it would
be actualized by one person invoking it; but it is easy to determine that no
one achieves the deity other than the individual who has actualized it. If
there were no cause of a deity, [136] it would not be actualized even if one
tried. That can certainly be understood by taking a close look at mundane
activities.
Son of good breeding, the quintessence of the Tantra of the Black Apparitions
of Isvara is none other than this. If this is not realized, even if you try to
actualize a deity, it will be difficult to succeed. Know that the lack of
success would be like that of a person shouting into an empty valley and
counting the times he does so.
Because he is in control of the three realms, he is the basis of the three
realms. He is rich in his enjoyment of emanating the three domains of
existence. The facet of clarity of his nature is the great differentiation of
samsara and nirvana. With in-dwelling, originally present, primordial wisdom as
the cause, the bodily aspect of the apparitional Black Protector Mahakala
appears and comes into existence. The realm of his speech consists of
spontaneous displays. The realm of his mind is empty and clear. All the Dharmas
of the path and fruition emanate from the aspect of his excellent qualities.
The emanating appearances of all the Protector Father Tantras from the aspect
of his enlightened activities are of the nature of skillful means; and all the
Goddess Mother Tantras emanate from the aspect of the wisdom of emptiness.
Page 91
Limpid, clear space itself is the Space Protector. The nutriment of earth is
the Earth Protector. The nutriment of water is the Water Protector. The
nutriment of fire is the Fire Protector. [137] The nutriment of air is the Air
Protector. The nutriment of the vital essence is the Vital Essence Protector.
All those are emanated from the aspects of limpidity and clarity. Whatever is
emanated, the total-ground consciousness, of the nature of emptiness and
clarity, is present as the cause. Emanated from that, the mind presents forms,
which are stabilized by a continuous stream of consciousness. Then by means of
conceptualization one considers all the nutriment and vital essences of the
animate and inanimate world as the rupakaya. By meditating on that, their
splendor and power grow. By calling them by name, such that one's recollection
of them is unwavering, signs of actualization will occur at least month by
month; and after just a year has passed, they will unquestionably be actualized
in the modes of one's sensory perception. Whatever deeds one performs, one is a
jnanasattva; and one's actions will disband the foes of ignorance and grasping
onto the reality of appearances, so that they will vanish altogether.
One's essential nature is primordial wisdom, so one is a jnanasattva. One's
formed aspect manifests as the aggregate of consciousness, so one is a mundane
being. Thus, one half dwells in the essential nature of a jnanasattva, while
the other half, in the nature of a mundane being, is presented as a glorious
tantric guardian who is actualized by the mind.23 The Tantra of the Enlightened
Activity of the Black Protector [138] is none other than this.
The emanated apparition of the Black Protector, the great lord of the outer and
inner elements, the embodiment of afflicted cognition, grasps onto the reality
of the elements in which the five poisons are equalized. Grasping onto that
which is nondual as being dual, it is the agent who differentiates the states
of
_______________
23 When we are still involved in grasping, we are sentient beings; but when we
are free of grasping, we are jnanasattvas.
Page 92
self and other. This is how it is presents: the faculty of pride that
ultimately sees space as substantial is the Space Rahula. The faculty of
delusion that sees earth as substantial is the Earth Rahula. The faculty of
attachment that sees water as substantial is the Water Rahula. The faculty of
hatred that sees fire as substantial is the Fire Rahula. The faculty of
jealousy that sees air as substantial is the Air Rahula. Their nutrition and
vital essences are the cause of the movement and presence of the flesh, blood,
warmth, and breath of living beings; and they are imagined as the embodiments
of the five poisons. By bringing them to mind and repeatedly imagining
countless numbers of them arising from their own respective elements and
dissolving, their power increases; and while imagining oneself as a deity, they
are actualized with unwavering consciousness. In order to stabilize that, one
applies oneself to the mantra of invocation focused on one's meditative object,
without one's consciousness being distracted elsewhere. By so doing, before
long they will be empirically actualized. [139I Then by constructing one's
deeds with conceptualization and making them concrete with consciousness, the
great Rahula who is actualized from the apparitions of thoughts of the deity
who is apprehended as a deity will annihilate on the spot the enemies that
arise from the apparitions of thoughts. The Tantra of the Aggregate of Contact
of the Black Planetary Mara is none other than this.
Consciousness, which devours appearing objects and is the creator of various
apparitions, and appearances, which are of the nature of limpid conscious
awareness, exist by the power of profound skillful means and dependent
relationships. A bounty of enjoyments is given as the appearing objects of
oath-bound people who give and actualize harm to the enemies of the ten fields.
The masters over all the elements and the animate and inanimate three realms
are assassins who withdraw into the absolute nature the life and breath of
enemies of the teachings of Secret Mantra. They are red in color, for
Page 93
they have the ability of power. As a sign that they are involved in ferocious,
violent activity, they have a luster of blackness. From self- arising
consciousness that apprehends all the cardinal and intermediate directions and
above and below arise the ten directional guardians. From the vital essence of
consciousness appear the apparitions of the violent eight classes [of mattas].
The self-illuminating faculty of limpid, clear mental cognition [140] manifests
everything. With clear visualization of the meditative object and with the
power of stable apprehension as the cause, and with aggressive concentration as
the contributing condition, the assembly of dependent relationships is brought
about. By so doing, one swiftly succeeds in such practice. The Tantra of the
Butcher Marlen Yaksa is none other than this.
The basis of emanation of all the eight classes of matta guardians of the
doctrine is the black Planetary Mara bearing an afflicted mind. From his inner
five elements, and with the power of the outer elements, the powerful red
assembly is created and dwells in the warmth of the fire element. There are
savage tsan of the flesh who move in the warmth of the flesh; there are savage
tsan of the blood who move in the warmth of the blood; and there are savage
tsan of the air who move in the warmth of the breath. There are savage tsan who
appear as the warmth of appearances. The domain of hatred in the mind consists
of the savage tsan of the mind. The heat of fire appears from its luster, and
that is the red tsan of fire. Yellow tsan of earth move in the warmth of earth.
White tsan of water move in the warmth of water. Green tsan of air move in the
warmth of air. Dark blue tsan of space move in the warmth of the sky. They are
all apparitions of hatred that blaze like fire. They are all under the power of
great emptiness, which is the ground of the mind. Thus, the absolute nature is
apprehended as form. It is created and meditated upon with continuous,
apprehending consciousness, [141] and when stability is achieved, empty form is
Page 94
empirically actualized. Here is the method to make the enemies and demonic
forces that originate from the elements and derivative elements destroy
themselves: with the dependent relationship of the fire element as the cause
and the achievement of stability in the clear visualization of that as the
contributing condition, the classes of savage tsan arise. So that action will
unquestionably be accomplished. The Tantra of the Savage Tsan Blazing Like Fire
is none other than this.
The entity who presents delusive appearances, bearing afflictive cognition, the
wrathful apparition who pervades and enters the whole universe, the embodiment
of pride, the apparitional Yamaraja, Lord of Death, displays himself in
appearances. This is the way he thoroughly enters the elements: the Fire Yama
is present in earth in the midst of partless particles of fire; earth is the
Earth Yama in the aggregates of particles of earth; water is the Water Yama, of
the nature of earth, in the midst of partless particles; air is the Air Yama,
present as earth in the midst of partless particles; space is called the Space
Yama, for it appears as earth from the empty absolute nature. In the domain of
the inner elements as well all flesh, blood, warmth, and breath appear from the
assembly of the nature of minute and partless particles; [142] so they are
Yama. Thus, grasping onto the reality of appearances is called the Mind Yama.
It is the Lord of Death who assembles the causes and conditions that dissolve
appearances into the absolute nature. With pride as the cause and the mind as
the contributing condition, one creates and meditates upon them. As a result of
continuous consciousness, an unprecedented, sudden dependent relationship is
brought about. The Tantra of Wrathful Yama, Lord of Death is none other than
this.
The emanation of great Visnu, an apparition of the mental affliction of self-
grasping, the embodiment of the violent vortex of jealousy, appears as the
yaksa called Kalayaksa. The Fire Yaksa is the movement of the motile vital
Page 95
energy in the nature of fire; the Earth Yaksa is the movement of the basic
vital energy of grasping in the element of earth; the Water Yaksa is the
movement of the powerful, sucking vital energy in the element of water; the Air
Yaksa is the presence of the vital energy that moves and pulses in the air
element; the Space Yaksa is the movement of the obscuring vital energy in the
element of space. Those are the causes and conditions for actualizing the
yaksas with practice. Likewise, the basic root of the appearances of outer
elements that also appear internally as the impure, five vital energies of the
cycle of existence consists of all the inner yaksas. For those who greatly
desire wealth and prosperity they are the basis for accomplishing that in the
three realms. [143] Grasping is comprised of vital energy, so if one calls
vital energies yaksas, and increases them and generates them, this is regarded
to be especially effective in performing expansive activity. Moreover, if that
is not practiced, one will not succeed, but if one generates them and practices
this with clarity and stability, there will be success. The Tantra of the
Treasury of the Black Yaksa is none other than this.
Likewise, emanations who present all manner of appearances, the embodiments of
attachment, who, like water, create disturbances, are the matrkas. Those lords
of attachment who totally pervade the psycho- physical aggregates, elements,
and sense-bases are the inner matrkas. The moisture present in the earth
element is the great Earth Matrka. The water present in the fire element is the
great Fire Matrka. The moisture present in the water element is the great Water
Matrka. The coolness present in the air element is the water of air, and that
is the great Air Matrka. The appearances of space as water is the great Space
Matrka. By practicing creating and meditating on the causal, self-defining
appearances of all the faculties and sense-bases, the matrkas appear although
they do not exist. By conceptually creating and meditating on them, one will
succeed in the activity of annihilating all appearing enemies and
Page 96
malevolent beings. The Tantra of the Display of the Ocean of mood of the Black
Matrka is none other than this. [144]24
The emanation of the ferocious, untamed Visnu, imbued with afflicted cognition,
the natural potency of the darkness of ignorance and delusion, is called the
Nine-headed Nagamara Lord of Death. The apparition created from the power of
generating and meditating on that being brings forth ignorance that pervades
and enters everything. Here is how that is done: ignorance of the state of
emptiness of all the inner elements is the Inner Naga; ignorance of the
identitylessness of fire is the Fire Nagamara; ignorance of the empty nature of
earth is the Earth Nagamara; ignorance of the state of emptiness of water is
the Water Nagamara; ignorance of the state of emptiness of air is the Air
Nagamara; ignorance of the empty state of space is called the Space Nagamara.
They are all causal ignorance, and due to the contributing power of focusing on
them and creating them, they are actualized. Apart from that, there is nothing
whatsoever called a naga. The Tantra of the Black Darkness of Nagas is none
other than this.
Parthivas emerge from the aggregates of grasping onto the I, and they are the
conceptual mental factors that grasp onto the reality of appearances. There are
parthiva who maintain the five elements as flesh, parthivas who maintain the
five elements as blood, parthivas who maintain the five elements as warmth,
parthivas who maintain the five elements as the breath, parthivas who maintain
the five elements as earth, parthivas who maintain the five elements as water,
piirthivas who maintain the five elements as fire, [145] partlrivas who
maintain the five elements as air, and parthivas who maintain the five elements
as space. Thus, all the outer and inner parthivas are included in each of the
five elements, and the appearance of them as a single entity is the cause of
all the classes of parthivas.
_______________
24The tantras cited here are found in the rNying ma'i rgyud 'bum, or Canon of
Nyingma Tantras. This entire discussion is concerned simply with explaining how
all these entities are created by the mind, without going into any of the
details of the specific practices for accomplishing mundane siddhis by
sublimating these beings.
Page 97
The parthivas and vigrahas are created by conceptually focusing on them. Due to
meditating on them, the contributing conditions appear to that cause.25 The
Tantra of the Parthivas' Assemblage of the Elements is none other than this.
Engaging with beautifully appearing objects such as form, sound, smell, taste,
and tactile sensations is the cause of the apparition of Mahavisnu, afflicted
cognition, the vicious, great mara; and that engagement is the white Devamara,
the lord of pleasure. Surrounded by the assembly of subtle and coarse
afflictive thoughts, this Mara of the Afflictions with unimpeded power leads
beings astray to the miserable states of existence. The great Mara of the
Aggregates, the impeded lord, leads beings to good, bad, and neutral manifestly
appearing objects. The black, arrogant Mara of Death brings about clinging to
appearances with various sorts of delusion in the darkness of ignorance, and he
steals away the vitality of liberation and omniscience. Moving among and
pervading the five elements, [146] the self-destroying Lord of Maras known as
the Long Arm of Grasping arises as wild, vicious objects. In order to preserve
the cause of all such maras and to actualize those who have not been
actualized, those objects are clearly brought to mind; and, imputing them with
the intellect, one accomplishes clarity and stability with a continuous stream
of consciousness. One unifies this with mindfulness, without letting the mind
be distracted elsewhere, and by calling them by name, due to the simultaneous
assembly of the dependently related event of the catalyst of immutable
mindfulness, the mattas are empirically actualized. The Tantra of the Black
Mara Who obscures Like Darkness is none other than this.
Apparitions of the faculties of emanations of afflicted cognition and so on
attract one to enjoyments and desirable objects, and due to clinging onto
appearances, the Mahadeva Hrisikesa is actualized in one's thoughts. As he
_______________
25 This phrase means simply that the contributing conditions interact with the
primary cause.
Page 98
roves in the domain of the inner elements, he creates the taste of pleasure and
causes it to be experienced. Roving in the domain of the five outer elements,
he creates desirable objects. With the cause of the deva, and with the
contributing condition of the diligent practice of generating him by
visualizing him, that dependently related event is empirically actualized.
[147] The Tantra of the Magical Creations of Enjoyments of the Mahadeva
Hrisikesa is none other than this.
If you do not know the method for actualizing the proud guardians of the
doctrine by the power of the dependent relationship of their causes and
contributing conditions, and if you do not know this tantra for their creation,
even if mattas were substantiated, you would not be able to set them to tasks.
Even if you actualized them, they would not obey you. Regardless of how much
you made offerings and supplications to them, the flow of their malice would
not stop. Even if you set them on your enemies, your own life would be at risk,
and your path to liberation would be blocked. At the beginning, middle, and end
there would be no constancy, and various good and bad things would be revealed.
Therefore, this most sublime of all tantras of creation, exceptionally profound
for transforming all practices into primordial wisdom, is the unsurpassed
essence of all practices. Why? By recognizing everything as being none other
than your own appearances, you achieve great mastery over the vitality of
samsara and nirvana.
As an analogy, when the one moon in the sky is eclipsed by Rahula, every single
reflection of the moon in every body of water is eclipsed. Likewise, from the
jinas, the perfected buddhas, down to maras, raksasas, arid rudras, the whole
of samsara and nirvana is of the same taste in the absolute nature of
Samantabhadra, the original ground dharmakaya. For people who know this and
ascertain it, [148] all beings from the five types of jinas down to subtle
pisacas and raksasas are ascertained solely as jnanasattvas who are none other
than displays of
Page 99
Samantabhadra. If individuals actualize devas by substantiating them, all those
they actualize due to grasping onto objects as self-defining will be solely
mundane beings; so it is certain that not a single one will be a jnanasattva.
Therefore, by knowing this tantra for the creation of mattas in general,
whatever deva you actualize, that is the cause of their being actualized as
jnanasattvas; and the means of swift success will be within you. Moreover, the
deva who is your own creation will be under the mastery of your own ground; and
devas who are actualized as apparitions imputed by conceptualization upon
appearing objects will unquestionably accomplish enlightened activities in an
instant. Within those displays, they cannot inflict harm; and the devas who are
actualized with clear, stable, manifest consciousness kill the enemies and
demons who arise from the potency of thoughts. No karma or karmic consequences
arise from such deeds.
All the devas and guardians who are propitiated and actualized in those ways
are originally not established; they have never existed; and they have none of
the fundamental roots of arising, abiding, and departing. That which causes
that which does not exist to appear to exist is present in one's own mind-
stream. By the power of creating and meditating on them as forms and as
entities with signs, [149] they are empirically actualized. The entire animate
and inanimate universe with all its sensory objects is originally free of any
fundamental ground. While not established, the entire phenomenal world with all
its sensory objects is made to appear directly and is illumined by mental
cognition. It is imputed by the intellect and fixedly grasped by
conceptualization as being real. In that way it is brought forth and actualized
as if it were truly existent. Know this to be so.26
_______________
26 The emphasis of the above section is on realizing the nature of all
guardians, demons, and gods as projections of your own mind. Then realize the
nature of your own mind to be awareness, and the nature of awareness to be the
sugatagarbha. By thus realizing the whole of samsara and nirvana to be of the
same nature, it is easy to accomplish all mundane and supramundane siddhis.
Page 100
Owing to the obscuration by ignorance of the original, primordial ground, all
the qualities of the appearance of the ground are hidden inside. The
appearances from its luster which, from the side of the appearances, arise as
truly existent are skillful means. The nothingness from the side of emptiness
is wisdom. The union of the divine father and mother is the ultimate path,
reality itself, which is none other than nonconceptual, primordial wisdom. That
arises from the dependently related assemblage of causes and contributing
conditions.
In that way generate the power of meditation, layout the collection of
offerings, which are like illusory substances, recite the increasing mantra,
which is like an illusory mantra, and display and visualize those offerings as
objects to the six senses, like illusory apparitions. Until those sensory
objects are dissolved back into the absolute nature, [150] visualize
inexhaustible sensory objects as a space treasury. That is called the illusory
apparition of samadhi, and it is the unsurpassed, greatest of all offerings and
gifts. Symbolically, that is like the display of enjoyments of Nirmanarati.
Take the analogy of a person caught up in a dream in which he experiences only
misery, with no enjoyments whatsoever. While in that state, someone else
forcefully wakes him up, shifting his appearances and bringing forth all manner
of wonderful things, so that he is brought to a state of happiness. Likewise,
one shifts the appearances of the offerings and gifts, emanating those sensory
objects as a treasury of space. In the expanse of the limpid, clear,
uncontaminated six faculties of all those recipients of offerings and gifts,
which are like a body of water, they are projected by the power of dependently
related causes and contributing conditions, including the sensory objects,
mantras, and samadhi. Recognize them as being like the sudden appearance of
reflections of the planets and stars.
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
