                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
                               by Dudjom Lingpa

The Vajra Heart Tantra
A Tantra Naturally Arisen from the Nature of Existence
from the Matrix of Primordial Awareness of Pure Perception
by
Dudjom Linpga
Translated from the Original Tibetan
Under the Guidance of Gyatrul Rinpoche
By B. Alan Wallace
Page i.
Preface

The text translated here as The Diamond Heart Tantra: A Tantra Naturally Arisen
from the Nature of Existence from the Matrix of Primordial Awareness of Pure
Perception[1] is among the principle "mind treasures" of Dudjom Lingpa (1835-
1904), one of the great Dzogchen masters of the Nyingma order of Tibetan
Buddhism in recent history. Commonly known among Tibetans as Neyluk Rangjung
(Naturally Arisen from the Nature of Existence), it is regarded as a general
commentary to another of Dudjom Lingpa's great works, Buddhahood Without
Meditation: A Visionary Account Known as Refining Apparent Phenomena, which has
been beautifully translated into English by Richard Burton under the guidance
of Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche.[2]
Also known as Garwang Dudjom Pawo, Dudjom Lingpa was born in the Golok region
of eastern Tibet on the tenth day of the first month of the Sheep Year.
According to a number of ancient and recent prophecies, as written by one of
his own subsequent emanations, H. H. Dudjom Rinpoche, his previous incarnations
include the following masters of the Buddhist tradition:
1. Nuden Dolje Chang: the buddha who bestowed empowerments upon all the
thousand buddhas of this fortunate eon.
2. Sariputra
_______________
1 Tibetan title: Dag snang ye shes drva pa las gnas lugs rang byung gi rgyud
rdo rje'i snying po. Sanskrit title:
Vajrahrdayasuddhadhutijnanaharesrilamjatiyatisma. Collected Works of H.H.
Dudjom Rinpoche. The following concise biography of Dudjom Lingpa is drawn from
the following texts: Tulku Thondup, The Origin of Buddhism in Tibet: The
Tantric Tradition of the Nyingmapa (Marion, MA: Buddhayana, 1984); Tulku
Thondup Rinpoche, Hidden Teachings of Tibet: An Explanation of the Terma
Tradition of the Nyingma School of Buddhism, ed. Harold Talbot (London: Wisdom,
1986); Dudjom Lingpa, Buddhahood Without Meditation: A Visionary Account Known
as Refining Apparent Phenomena (Nang-jang), trans. from the Tibetan under the
direction of Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche by Richard Burton (Junction City, CA: Padma
Publishing Co., 1994; Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism,
trans. and ed. by Gyurme
Dorje with Matthew Kapstein (Boston: Wisdom, 1991); and H.H. Dudjom Rinpoche
Jigdral Yeshe Dolje, Dudjom Tersar Ngondro (New York: Yeshe Melong, 1992).
2 Dudjom Lingpa, Buddhahood Without Meditation: A Visionary Account Known as
Refining Apparent Phenomena (Nang-jang), trans. from the Tibetan under the
direction of Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche
by Richard Burton (Junction City, CA: Padma Publishing Co., 1994.

Page ii.
3. Saraja
4. Krsnadhara
5. Humkara
6. Drogpen Kyeuchung Lotsa
7. Smrtijnana
8. Rongzom Chokyi Zangpo
9. Dampa Deshek
10. Lingje Repa
11. Chogyal Pagpa
12. Drumgyi Karnagpa
13. Hepa Chojung
14. Tragtung Duddul Dorje
15. Sonam Deutsen
16. Duddul Rolpa Tsel
According to Dudjom Lingpa's own autobiography,[3] during the first three years
of his life, he saw hosts of dakinis and protective deities looking over him.
On one occasion a dakini led him to Oddiyana, the realm of the dakinis, where
he encountered Vajravarahi, foremost of the dakinis, from whom he received
great blessings. During his youth, he also spent one human day at Palri on the
subcontinent of Ngayab (Skt.?), which equalled twelve years in the time of that
realm. There he received teachings from Padmasambhava himself. On various
occasions he also received prophecies from Padmasambhava's consort Yeshe
Tsogyal, who she cared for him her like own son.
_______________
3The Autobiography of the bDud jom-ging pa (gTer chen chos kyi rgyal po khrag
'thung bdud 'joms gling pa'i rnam par thar pa zhal gsung ma), by Dud joms Ling
pa, ed by Padma-lung rtogs rgya-mtsho (Dehradun: G.T.K. Lodoy and N. Gyaltsan,
1970).
Page iii.
Dudjom Lingpa had eight renowned sons, including Jigme Tenpey Nyima, the Third
Dodrup Chen Rinpoche (1865-1926), who was a consummate scholar and adept of
both the sutras and tantras. During the course of his life, Dudjom Lingpa
performed many miracles, and he reached the highest stages of realization of
the stages of generation and completion as well as the Great Perfection. It is
said that thirteen of his disciples attained the Rainbow Body, and one thousand
became vidyadharas through gaining insight into the essential nature of
awareness.
Dudjom Lingpa's subsequent incarnations include His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche,
Jigdral Yeshe Dorje, his mind emanation and the editor of the Tibetan version
of the text translated here; Tulku Kunzang Nyima (Tib. sPrul sku kun bzang nyi
ma) his speech emanation; Sonam Detsen, his body emanation; Jamyang Natsok
Rangdrol, also known as Dorje Dragtsel Lingpa, an emanation of his enlightened
activities; and Tulku Drachen (Rahula, sp?), an emanation of his enlightened
qualities.
In one of Dudjom Lingpa's dreams, a devaputra named Dunggi Zurphu prophesied
that the benefit from his profound hidden treasures would go west, saying,
"Those deserving to be tamed by you dwell in human cities to the west." In the
hope to help fulfill that prophesy, the present translation of his hidden
treasure The Diamond Heart Tantra was made under the guidance of the Venerable
Gyatrul Rinpoche, who has been teaching in the west since 1972. Gyatrul
Rinpoche received the oral transmission of this text three times from three of
the emanations of Dudjom Lingpa: in Tibet he received it from Jamyang Natsok
Rangdrol and from Tulku Kunzang Nyima, and later in Nepal he received it from
His Holiness Dudjom Rinpoche, Jigdral Yeshe Dorje, the Supreme Head of the
Nyingma order of Tibetan Buddhism.
Page iv.
Beginning in the autumn of 1995, I read through this text once with Gyatrul
Rinpoche, receiving many points of clarification from him. While working on a
first-draft translation, he went through the text with me line- by- line,
carefully correcting errors in my translation and elucidating points of
lingering uncertainty in my own comprehension of the text. I am deeply grateful
to him for opening this treasure to me for the benefit of all those who may
read our translation. I am also indebted to Dr. Yeshi Dhonden and Khenpo
Tsewang Gyatso for elucidating some points of the text.
Page v.
Preface Notes
Tulku Thondup, The Origin of Buddhism in Tibet: The Tantric Tradition of the
Nyingmapa (Marion, MA: Buddhayana, 1984).
1. gTer ston las rab gling pa, aka bSon nams rnam rgyal, aka. gNyags la
bsod nams (sp?) (1856-1926)
Disciple of 'Jam dbyangs mkhyen rtse'i dbang po rdo rje gzi brjid rtsal
(1820-1892), who was the founder of the Ris med movement, and an incarnation of
Vimalamitra His five incarnations include Ka thog mkhyen rtse chos kyi blo gros
(1893-1959, aka rDzong gsar mkhyen rtse.
Disciple of Nyo shul lung rtogs bstan pa'i nyi ma (sp?).
Disciple of dPal sprul rin po che, O rgyan 'jigs med chos kyi dbang po
(1808-1887)
Disciple of Third rDo grub chen Rinpoche
2. bDud 'joms gling pa (1835-1904) from mGo log
First bDud 'joms, aka Giley Terton and Chagkong Terton
Incarnation of sKye'u chung lo tshva, a disciple of Padmasambhava, and
of gTer chen bdud 'dul rdo rje (1615-1672).
Had eight renowned sons, including 'Jigs med bstan pa'i nyi ma, the
Third Dodrup Chen Rinpoche (1865-1926), whose mother was bSod nams mtsho.
Another of his consorts, Sera Khandro, composed a superb commentary to his
Nangjang.
Reincarnated as sPrul sku pad ma mam rgyal (?) ( -1957) and Dudjom
Rinpoche, 'Jigs bral ye shes rdo rje, (1904-87)
Tulku Thondup Rinpoche, Hidden Teachings of Tibet: An Explanation of the Terma
Tradition of the Nyingma School of Buddhism, ed. Harold Talbot (London: Wisdom,
1986).
From Autobiography of the Terton dud jom Ling pa (1835-1904) gTer chen chos kyi
rgyal po khrag 'thung bdud 'joms gling pa'i rnam par thar pa zhal gsung ma. By
Dud joms Ling pa. Published by Dupjung Lama, 1978)
p. 48b. From a dakini he received instructions and discovered in Bater
Mountain instructions on how and where he would find a prophetic guide (as well
as a rosary from Saraha and an image of Tara made from red sand) from Ngulgo
Mountain, enabling him to discover the Terma from Ngala Tagtse by lower Ser
Valley .
p. 49b. As soon as he arrived at Bater Mt., a rock fell down from the
mountain, revealing the treasures beneath it.
Dudjom Lingpa, Buddhahood Without Meditation: A Visionary Account Known as
Refining Apparent Phenomena (Nang-jang), trans. from the Tibetan under the
direction of Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche by Richard Burton (Junction City, CA: Padma
Publishing Co., 1994.
Born tenth day of the first month of the Sheep Year.
During the first three years of his life he saw hosts of dakinis and protective
deities looking over him.
On one occasion a dakini led him to Oddiyana, the realm of the dakinis,
where he encountered Vajravarahi, foremost of the dakinis, from whom he
received great blessings.
Page vi.
He visited dPal Ri on the subcontinent of Nga yab, s;pending one human day,
which equalled twelve years of the time of that domain. There he received
teachings from Orgyen Rinpoche.
He received prophecies from Yeshe Tsogyal and she cared for him like her son.
He performed many miracles; he perfected the stages of generation and
completion and well as the Great Perfection.
Thirteen of his disciples attained the Rainbow Body, and one thousand became
vidyadharas.
In his dreams, a devaputra named Dung-gi Zur phud prophesied that the benefit
to beings deriving from his profound hidden treasures would go west, saying,
"Those cities of human beings to the west hold those deserving of being tamed
by you," and "The sounding of the conch shell in the west is a sign of your
fame increasing. The shining of rays of sunlight in pits in the ground is
symbolic of those you will tame."
Dudjom Rinpoche, The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism, trans. and ed. by
Gyurme Dorje with Matthew Kapstein (Boston: Wisdom, 1991).
Gyatrul Rinpoche:
The five reincarnations of Dudjom Lingpa were:
Mind: 'Jigs bral ye shes rdo rje
Speech: sPrul sku kun bzang nyi ma
Body: bSod nams Ide btsan
Enlightened Activity: 'Jam dbyangs sna tshogs rang grol (rDo rje drag rtsal
gling pa)
Qualities: sPrul sku Drachan (Rahula, sp?)
The body and speech emanations passed away on the same day, early in 1958.
Gyatrul Rinpoche received the oral transmission of this text twice in Tibet
from 'Jam dbyangs sna tshogs rang grol and from sPrul sku kun bzang nyi ma, and
later in Nepal he received it again from 'Jigs bral ye shes rdo rje.
H.H. Dudjom Rinpoche Jigdral Yeshe Dorje, Dudjom Tersar Ngondro (New York:
Yeshe Melong, 1992).
Dudjom Lingpa = Gar dbang bdud 'joms dpa' bo
Previous Line of Incarnations, according to Dudjom Rinpoche, past treasures and
spiritual precepts as well as the mind and speech of the following previous
vidyadharas:
1. Nus ldan rdo rje 'chang: the Buddha who bestowed empowerments upon all the
thousand Buddhas of this fortunate eon.
2. Sariputra
3. Saraha
4. Krsnadhara
5. Humkara
6. 'Drogpen Kyeuchung Lotsa (Tib. Brog pan khye'u chung lo tsa)
7. Smrtijnana
8. Rongzom Chokyi Zangpo (Tib. Rong zom chos kyi bzang po)
9. Dampa Deshek (Tib. Dam pa bde gshegs )
10, Lingje Repa (Tib. gLing rje ras pa)
11. Chogyal Pagpa (Tib. Chos rgyal 'phags pa)
12. Drumgyi Karnagpa (Tib. Grum gyi mkhar nag pa)
Page vii.
13. Hepa Chojung (Tib. He pa chos 'byung)
14. Tragtung Duddul Dorje (Tib: Khrag 'thung bdud 'dul rdo rje)
15. Sodnam Deutsen (Tib. bSod nams lde'u btsan)
16. Duddul Rolpa Tsel (Tib. bDud 'dul rol pa rtsal)
17. Garwang Dudjom Pawo (Tib. Gar dbang bdud 'jomgs dpa' bo)
Garab Dorje = Pramodavajra
Page viii.
Table_of_Contents
Introduction,_Page_1
Homage and Commitment to Compose this Treatise, P.1
How this Tantra First Arose, P.2
The_Questions_of_Prajnendra,_P.6
The_Questions_of_Mahasahasrananta,_P.8
Practical Instructions for Achieving Buddhahood in One Life, P. 8
Taking the Mind as the Path to Liberation, P.12
The Cultivation of Quiescence, P.19
How Experiential Realizations Arise Due to Practice, P. 21
The_Questions_of_Prasannatindra,_P._30
The Path of Conscious Awareness and Its Resultant Qualities, P.32
The Way to Determine the Reality of Emptiness, P.34
The_Questions_of_Samantabhasavyuhendra,_P.46
Appearances and Reality, P.46
The Significance of Virtue and Vice, P.55
On Gods and Demons, P.58
On Buddhas and Buddha-fields, P.65
On the Six States of Existence, P.68
The Nature of Awareness, P.72
The Ground, Path, and Fruition, P.80
Sublimating Mundane Gods and Demons, P.90
The Severance of Maras, P.103
The Questions of Vidyavajra, P.107
The Universal Foundation of All the Yanas, P.107
The Distinction Between Buddhas and Sentient Beings, P.113
Knowing Emptiness and Achieving Buddhahood, P.114
Page ix.
The Nature of the Embodiments and Primordial Wisdoms, P.118
The Nature of Good and Bad Deeds, P.120
The Purpose of Dharma Teachings, P.122
The Five Embodiments, P.125
The Five Primordial Wisdoms, P.128
The Five Castes and the Five Spiritual Classes, P.131
The Two Paths of the Stage of Generation, P.135
Going for Refuge, P.135
The Spirit of Awakening, P.139
The Generation of the Peaceful Mandala, P.146
The Generation of the Wrathful Mandala, P.151
General Mahayoga Practice, P.164
Ultimate and Conventional Practices, P.164
Elements of the Practice, P.167
The Ganacakra Offering, P.171
The Practice of Deliverance, P.173
Conventional and Ultimate Realities in the Stage of Generation, P.179
Developing the Four Types of Enlightened Activities, P.186
The Vajrayogini Practice of Tummo, P.191
The Synthesis, Nature, and Names of the Ground, P.202
The Nine Yanas, P.209
The Seven Wisdoms and Seven Energies, P.211
The Great Vajra Laughter, P.215
How to Practice the Great Perfection, P.218
The Four Thoughts that Turn the Mind, P.218
The Main Practice, P.222
The Practice during Meditative Equipoise, P.222
Page x.
The Practice during the Post-meditative State, P.223
The Advantages of Identifying Awareness, P.234
Obstacles and Pitfalls in the Practice of the Great Perfection, P.245
Distinguishing between understanding and realization, P.245
Distinguishing between the mind and awareness, P.247
Distinguishing between between cognition and wisdom, P.249
Distinguishing between consciousness and primordial wisdom, P.251
Distinguishing between between the total ground and the dharmakaya, P. 253
Distinguishing between that which is and is not the path, P.256
Distinguishing between mastering the ground and succumbing to the ethically
neutral, P.256
Distinguishing between delusion and liberation, P.257
Distinguishing between buddhas and sentient beings, P.265
The Swift Path of the Leap-over, P.267
Practicing the Instructions on the Great Clear Light Leap-over, P.275
The Outer Segregation, P.275
The Inner Segregation, P.281
The Secret Segregation, P.284
The Main Practice of the Leap-over, P.290
Progress in Meditative Experience, P.298
The Grounds and Paths, P.307
The Five Buddha-fields, P.311
The Attainment of Buddhahood, P.317
The Questions of the Entire Assembly, P.322
The Essential Practices in the Intermediate State, P.322
The Transitional Process of Living, P.323
Page xi.
The Transitional Process of Meditative Stabilization, P.326
The Transitional Process of Dreaming, P.328
The Transitional Process of Dying, P.329
The Transitional Process of Reality-itself, P.332
The Transitional Process of Becoming, P.337
The Reasons Why This Tantra Was Revealed, P.347
Conclusion, P.348
Colophon, P.349
Consultants: Gyatrul Rinpoche, Khenpo Tsering Gyatso, Dr. Yeshi Donden, Prof.
Steven Goodman
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
