


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 126
The ground is unmoved throughout the three times, and it does not change for
the better or the worse, so it is called immutable, and because it is endowed
with the seven qualities of the indestructible vajra, it is called Vajra. The
seven qualities are: [1] invulnerable to all karmas, mental afflictions, and
habitual propensities, [2] indestructible by any objects or contributing
conditions, [3] real, for it abides as the primordially pure, self-nature of
the great, primordial ground of the whole of samsara and nirvana, [4]
incorruptible, for it cannot be contaminated by any good or bad qualities, [5]
stable, for it is unfluctuating and unmoving throughout the three times, [6]
totally unobstructed, [188] for it can pierce even the most subtle cognitive
obscurations in the absolute nature of reality-itself, which transcends
causality , and [7] invincible, for it cannot be transformed by either samsara
or nirvana.
Thus, sentient beings lacking the necessary karmic propensities cannot possibly
realize the entire mode of existence and mode of being of the sugatagarbha, the
dharmakaya that is present as the ground, so they remain deluded in the endless
cycle of existence. For all those who realize it, it is impossible for them not
to achieve penetration to its depths. If one achieves such penetration, it is
impossible that one will not become liberated, and if one is liberated, it is
impossible that one will not become enlightened. Thus, it is endowed with the
four vajra-pledges, and it is called the ultimate, indestructible vajra. Within
that real vajra all paths and fruitions and all the excellent qualities of the
wonderful displays of the embodiments and primordial wisdoms are gathered
together, or assembled, as it were. Because of this aggregation and completion,
it is called kaya.
All the jinas and jinaputras of the three times are included and revealed among
the five embodiments. All of them are naturally perfected in the ground itself,
and that is the characteristic of the ultimate ground. It does not exist as a
Page 127
separate reality, it has no real characteristics that exist individually, and
it has no basis for verbal articulation. All teachings concerning names and
individual real characteristics are called conventional. Moreover, the ground
from which all the deities emerge is revealed as Samantabhadra. [189] As its
creative expressions, the five classes of buddhas are said to come into
existence from the five primordial wisdoms. The Buddha of the center and his
animate and inanimate environment are brought into existence from the
primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality.The Buddha of the east and
his world are brought into existence from the mirror-like primordial wisdom.
The Buddha of the south and his animate and inanimate environment are brought
into existence from the primordial wisdom of equality.The Buddha of the west
and his animate and inanimate environment are brought into existence from the
primordial wisdom of discernment. The Buddha of the north and his animate and
inanimate environment are brought into existence from the primordial wisdom of
accomplishment. Those assertions are not of a definitive nature.
Ultimately the essential nature of the ground, emptiness, is the universal
ground of the whole of samsara and nirvana. [1] As such, it is called the
absolute nature of reality , and because it is primordially self-arisen, it is
called primordial wisdom. It is not located in the center, so placing it in the
center is a mere convention. [2] Because the limpid, clear ground, free of
contamination, gives rise to all manner of appearances of samsara and nirvana,
it is called a mirror, and that very consciousness, which is self-arisen and
primordially present, is called primordial wisdom. Speaking of it as being in
the east is a mere convention. [3] All of samsara, nirvana, and the paths exist
equally in the realm of reality-itself, the sugatagarbha, so that is called
equality. [190] Transcending consciousness and objects of consciousness, that
which reveals the nature of thatness without concealment is called primordial
wisdom. Placing it in the south is a mere
Page 128
convention. [4] Ontological and phenomenological primordial wisdom is an
unceasing avenue for the individual, unblended arising of phenomena, so it is
called discernment, and because it manifests that nature as it is, it is called
primordial wisdom. Placing it in the west is a mere convention. [5] All
purification and liberation and all displays of embodiments and primordial
wisdoms are not created by actions, nor accomplished with effort, but are
spontaneously brought into existence, so that is called accomplishing. The
manifestation of such a mode of existence is called primordial wisdom. Placing
it in the north is a mere convention.
Those five primordial wisdoms are not separate or distinct. All the individual
designations of labels upon the essential nature of the ground sugatagarbha
consist of conventional, provisional meanings. Know that ultimately, labels and
things do not exist as signs, and the dharmakaya, which is unassociated with
any direction, is free of signs.
For individuals who cling onto objects, objective buddha-fields are revealed in
accordance with their own mind-streams. In terms of conventional, provisional
meanings, the buddha-field of Ghanavyuha is said to be in the central region;
but ultimately, [191] the infinitude and limitless aspect of the magnificent
displays of the primordial wisdoms and qualities of the primordial ground,
sugatagarbha, are called Ghanavyuha; and because it is like a field, a great
domain in which the appearances of the whole of samsara and nirvana emerge, it
is called a field; and since everything that arises of samsara and nirvana is
of one taste in the sugatagarbha itself, it is called a realm.
As for that which is called the buddha-field of Abhirati, the aspect of great
delight, which is not created by objective conditions or agents, in the nature
of the limpid, clear, uncontaminated, ground absolute nature is called the
buddha field of Abhirati. All primordial wisdoms and qualities and all the
phenomena of
Page 129
the paths and fruitions are naturally perfected in the ground, so it is a
glorious buddha-field.
The nature of great bliss of the ground absolute nature, reality-itself, is
called the buddha-field of Sukhavati. In the ground itself all deeds of
purificatory and liberating primordial wisdom and all excellent qualities are
naturally, effortlessly perfected, so it is called the Field of Karmaprapurana.
Teachings concerning their existence in the east, south, west, and north are
not to be taken literally. Rather, they are taught for the sake of leading
disciples who grasp onto directions. [192] Thus, the nonexistence of a buddha-
field is called a field. As an object presented by the intellect, the qualities
of the ground-sugatagarbha cannot be conceptually measured and fathomed by the
intellect as great, primordial perfection; so they are called immeasurable.
They suffuse the whole of sanmsara and nirvana, just as the abodes of the
planets, stars, and other reflections in the ocean are ascertained in the great
ocean. And just as space is like the abode of the entire animate and inanimate
universe, the expanse of space is like the abode in which samsara and nirvana
appear. The perfection of them all as displays of the absolute nature is the
ultimate, and discussions of their forms, shapes, and colors are
conventional.33
For people who cling to castes, the leader of two thousand, three thousand, or
more villages is a king, and those who belong to that caste are called
ksatriyas. Leaders of one hundred or fewer villages are vaisyas, and those
belonging to that caste are also regarded as vaisyas. Those belonging to the
servant-caste are vrsalas. Those who participate in pure conduct, partake of
pure food, and are seen to have virtuous attitudes are brahmins. [193] Those
having no regard for hygiene, who partake of blood and flesh, and who
constantly delight in evil thoughts and deeds are regarded as sudras.
_______________
33 The above paragraph provides an etymology for the Tibetan term gzhaI yas
khang, literally immeasurable abode, referring to the divine palace in the
midst of a mandala.
Page 130
In accordance with that custom, the meaning of the teachings on the classes [of
the buddhas] is as follows. The taints of karma, mental afflictions, and
ignorance of the great, absolute nature--in which the essential nature of the
ground, of one taste, nondual with all the jinas of the three times--are
cleared out in the absolute nature, so that is said to be cleared out. Because
the nature of primordial wisdom and excellent qualities is expansive, it is
called expansive. Emanations from the aspect of its essential nature are called
the buddha class.34
The indestructible ground is endowed with the seven vajra-attributes, so it is
called vajra, and emanations from the indestructible vajra-like ground are
called the vajra Class.
A wish-fulfilling gem grants all the wishes of its owner. Likewise,
inconceivable entrances to the path, inconceivable experiences, and
inconceivable fruitional achievements arise from the ground-sugatagarbha in
accordance with the mind-streams of all disciples, all with their own
inconceivable metabolisms and faculties; so that is called the jewel class.
Although a lotus flower is born from slime, it has none of the faults of slime.
Likewise, the ground-sugatagarbha itself is uncontaminated by the taints of the
three worlds, [194] so that is called the lotus class.
In the domain of the ground-sugatagarbha all deeds are self-arisen and
complete, not with actions and striving, so that is called the karma class.
Those are merely verbal designations. Thus, the nondifferentiation and natural
perfection of the classes is taught as the ultimate, and the contrived
differentiation of the classes is taught as the conventional, provisional
meaning.
The reference to Vairocana, the lord who is the master of the central region,
as the basis of emanation of all the jinas belonging to the buddha class is
_______________
34 The above paragraph provides an etymology for the Tibetan sangs rgyas kyi
rigs, (Skt. buddhadhatu) literally buddha class, or buddha caste, which is
frequently translated as the buddha-nature.
Page 131
not ultimately established. The limpid, clear aspect of the natural potency of
the ground, the empty absolute nature is made manifest by pervasive, all-
seeing, great wisdom. Simply by doing so, all the primordial wisdoms and
qualities of the domain of the ground-sugatagarbha are fully illuminated, so
that is called Vairocana. Due to that not manifesting, there is no Awakening;
and merely due to its manifestation there is no difficulty in becoming a
buddha, so that is the buddha class.
The indestructible great being endowed with the seven vajra-attributes, the
ground absolute nature, is Prabhuvajra. The great Aksobhya is so called due to
being unmoved throughout the three times. [195] The precious, spontaneously
present, ground absolute nature, with its great displays of embodiments and
primordial wisdoms, from which arise all supreme and common siddhis, the
absolute nature endowed with all real meaning, is Ratnasambhava. Amitabha is so
called due to being limitless and illuminating inconceivable displays of
ground-appearances from the gound. In the ground absolute nature itself the
meaning of all sublime Dharmas is naturally present, so it is called Amogha,
and since all enlightened activities are completely accomplished, it is called
siddhi.
Mamanyasridhatvaisvarya is so called because emptiness, the space- vajra, the
great absolute nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana, replete with all the
primordial wisdoms and qualities, is the creator of samsara and nirvana; and
because she is the great mother of the whole of samsara and nirvana, free of
movement throughout the three times, she is called devi.35 Great emptiness, the
great pervasive lady, is endowed with the seven attributes of the
indestructible vajra, so she is called Vajra; and since all the phenomena in
the universe appear in the aspect of objects coming and going in the absolute
nature of space, the great
_______________
35 Another name for Akasadhatvisvari, the consort of Vairocana.
Page 132
pervasive emptiness-vajra, she is called dakini.36 All manner of desired
objects arise from the primordial ground, the primordially pure, spontaneously
present, absolute nature, [196] so that is called Ratna; and because all
appearances of the path and all qualities of the fruition emerge from the
creative power of compassion in the immutable space of reality-itself, that is
called dakini.37 Just as a lotus flower is unstained by mud, so is the
sugatagarbha unstained by the fault of attachment, so it is called Padma; and
because many avenues of skillful means arise from the creative power of
compassion in the space of reality-itself, it is called dakinis.38 All deeds
are inactively accomplished in the realm of the ground-qualities, the great,
primordial perfection, so that is called karma; and the appearances of coming
and going of all the phenomena of samsara and nirvana in the expanse of the
space of emptiness is the dakini of karma, that is called dakini.39 Those are
merely verbal designations.
Space appearing as the nature of space is skillful means and conventional
reality, while the manifestation of the inherent nonexistence of space is
wisdom and ultimate reality; and references to the dakini of the buddha class
consist of provisional meanings. The appearance of earth as earth is skillful
means and conventional reality , while the manifestation of the inherent
nonexistence of earth is wisdom and ultimate reality; and the designation of
Ratnadakini is an provisional meaning. [197] The nature of water appearing as
water is skillful means and conventional reality, while the manifestation of
the inherent nonexistence of water is wisdom and ultimate reality; and
references to Vajradakini consist of provisional meanings. The appearance of
fire as fire is skillful means and conventional reality, while the
manifestation of the inherent nonexistence of fire is wisdom and ultimate
reality; and the designation of
_______________
36 Vajradakin.i is another name for Buddhalocana, the consort of Aksobhya.
37 Tib. Rin po che mkha' 'gro, another name for Mamaki, the consort of
Ratnasambhava.
38 Padmadakini is another name for Pandaravasini, the consort of Amitabha.
39 Karmadakini is another name for Samayatara, the consort of Amoghasiddhi.
Page 133
Padmadakini is an provisional meaning. The appearance of air as air is skillful
means and conventional reality, while the manifestation of the inherent
nonexistence of earth is ultimate reality and wisdom; and references to
Karmadakini consist of provisional meanings.
All the jinas and jinaputras, including the thousand buddhas of this fortunate
eon, who teach in order to guide disciples, are none other than the five
embodiments and the five primordial wisdoms. Hence, all of them without
exception are included among their displays. People within the cycle of
existence perceive, cling onto, and are deluded by such things as class,
genealogy, regions, homes, and gender. Thus, if they were not taught
accordingly, disciples who cling to those things, [198] fixating on their
permanence, would not be satisfied; and they would not follow the path of
liberation. With this realization and taking the embodiments and primordial
wisdoms of the signless dharmakaya as the basis, things bearing signs are
revealed. But in reality certainly not even a single one of all the deities and
buddha-fields is established."
Then the Bodhisattva Vidyavajra asked, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, taking the
signless dharmakaya, devoid of all extremes of conceptual elaboration, as the
ground, and bearing in mind disciples who grasp onto permanence, paths are
revealed as having signs and objectivity. How does one practice those
teachings? May the Teacher explain!"
He replied, "O Vidyavajra, there are many enumerations with respect to the
referential path of the stage of generation, but with respect to the path of
Secret Mantra Vajrayana there is the so-called complete, definite path and the
so-called natural path of the powerful view. The former reveals the deities and
buddha fields as definitely existent, self-defining objects, and it solely
emphasizes the avenue of conventional, skillful means. [199] The ultimate view
is merely implied, but not explicitly emphasized.
Page 134
As for the natural path of the powerful view, one first establishes the view
and accurately realizes that the deities and mandala do not exist as anything
other than apparitions of the original, primordial ground alone. Then in order
to transfer and merge one's own body, speech, and mind into the domain of the
three vajras, one takes the illusion-like samadhi as one's basis and recognizes
the manner in which the appearances of deities are created as if they were
apparitions. Thus, by accustoming oneself to the visualized appearances of the
stage of generation, one achieves stability upon one's own awareness; ordinary
appearances and clinging are transferred to the nature of buddha-fields; and
one's body, speech, and mind are transferred to the domain of the three vajras.
Hence, that is called the transference and merging into a domain.
First one establishes that all phenomena in the whole of samsara and nirvana
are of an empty, identityless nature; and finally one confirms first-hand that
one's own awareness is never anything but a display of the embodiments and
primordial wisdoms. That is called the real going for refuge in the mode of
being. Remaining without veering from the state in which all the jinas and
jinaputras of the three times are combined and in which their vital essence is
unified [200] is the essential nature of going for refuge.
Proudly assume that fruition and applying oneself to its cause is a method that
corresponds to the ways of the world. As an analogy, if someone were to go to a
foreign kingdom, casually occupy some land, and apply himself to farming it,
there is no way he could avoid the pain of being punished by the reigning king.
But if he were to seek the protection of the king, submit a petition to him,
then he would have the authority to do whatever farming or anything else he
wanted with his land in that kingdom. Likewise, if one does not go for refuge
by mentally taking the natural luster of awareness that is present as the
ground-dharmakaya as one's outer, inner, and secret object of refuge, one is
not
Page 135
authorized to engage in the deeds of the Three Jewels. Consequently, the
fruition would not be granted, one would succumb to obstacles, and one would
have the fault of not being a suitable vessel for empowerments and spiritual
counseling. Therefore, going for refuge by way of the threefold faith in the
Three Jewels, offering them one's body, speech, and mind and all one's
enjoyments and possessions without attachment, clinging, or grasping, and at
all times and situations never even for an instant failing to entrust oneself
to the sublime objects of refuge [201] is the foundation for all the samayas
and vows and is the root of all empowerments and siddhis. Thus, maintain this
as your very life-essence itself.
Whether you are elevated or cast down, immersed in happiness or tormented with
pain, and in any type of activity reflect, 'The Three Jewels know!' That is the
sublime, fundamental ground of all practice. In particular, know that the
naturally appearing, supreme Teacher of disciples is their holy spiritual
mentor, whose body is the Sangha, whose speech is the holy Dharma, and whose
mind is the Buddha. Know that the spiritual mentor is the synthesis of all the
sublime objects of refuge. Know that the secret body appearing as the spiritual
mentor of living beings is the root of all blessings; the secret mind, the
treasury of primordial wisdom, which is the combined display of all the chosen
deities, is the root of all siddhis; know that the apparitions of compassion
who appear as myriads of guardians of the doctrine and Dharma protectors are
the root of all enlightened activities.
Their essential nature is the dharmakaya, devoid of signs; their nature is the
sambhogakayas, which consist of displays of the embodiments and primordial
wisdoms; and the natural, creative expressions of their compassion are the
supreme nirmanakayas, consisting of the entrances to the paths and fruition.
Recognize them as the Omnipresent Lords of all the mandalas, and take refuge in
Page 136
them without being separated from them for even a moment. Remain under their
protection. Utterly entrust your mind, heart, and body to them. [202] Practice
without abandoning them even at the cost of your life; and rely upon the
principle deity of all the mandalas, without displeasing this being even in the
slightest. If you indulge in false views or displease this being even in a
dream, it is crucial that you bring forth remorse and confess this. If you
abandon the vajraguru, this is tantamount to abandoning the Three Jewels, the
Three Roots, the three kayas, the jinas, and jinaputras. In the mind-stream of
one who does so, the primordial wisdoms and qualities and all experiential
realizations will not mature; and however much such a person strives
physically, verbally, and mentally, the accumulations of merit and knowledge
will not be perfected, and the fruition will not come to maturation. Even if
one devotes oneself to another spiritual mentor, blessings and siddhis will not
occur. Due to being possessed by the evil spirit of degenerated samayas, they
will be transgressed.
As analogies, seedlings and fruit do not mature from a rotten seed, and
branches and leaves do not grow on a trunk with a rotten root. Similarly, the
vajraguru is like the root of the trunk of the Secret Mantra, and the vajraguru
is like the seed and the field of the harvest of omniscience. Thus, recognize
this fact, and devote yourself to the vajraguru without abandoning this being
even for an instant. Know that if you recognize the spiritual mentor in that
way as the synthesis of all the buddhas, and go for refuge while meditating on
your spiritual mentor, in the nature of your chosen deity, in the space in
front of you, [203] there is certainly no need to seek any object of refuge
elsewhere.
As for the Cultivation of the Spirit, the cultivation of the ultimate spirit is
as follows. In terms of spirit, narrow-mind, confining grasping onto oneself
alone causes one to hold onto pleasure, pain, and indifference and regard all
objects as being self-defining. Then desires and cravings arise in an unbroken
Page 137
stream. Thus, all appearances and mental states involving grasping onto
appearances as real things are to be comprehended with discerning wisdom, and
self-concepts and the reification of dualistic appearances are to be subjugated
so that they disappear. Then the perception of identitylessness, an inactive
state, free of conceptual elaboration, in which samsara and nirvana appear as
displays of a totality is called the Cultivation of the Spirit that is the
inception into the nature of being. That is the fruition of all cultivations of
the spirit and is the most sublime of all Dharmas.
First of all, in order to realize the Spirit of Awakening, comprehending the
nature of being of the whole of samsara and nirvana by means of discerning
wisdom is called the Spirit of Aspiring for Awakening. Finally, the perception
of samsara and nirvana as displays of the totality is called the Spirit of
Venturing towards Awakening. When they speak of bringing forth the Cultivation
of the Spirit those who do not realize this critical point say they accomplish
its cause by aspiring for the fruitional Spirit of Awakening; [204] and they
say that is engaging in the mere aspiration for an object of conceptualization
that is not the Spirit of Awakening. Such talk is merely giving a boy's name to
a fetus in a pregnant woman's womb,40 but they do not have even the faintest
realization of the Spirit of Venturing towards Awakening.
Therefore, these are the merely nominal teachings on intentionally training
oneself in good thoughts, for the merely nominal Spirit of Aspiring and Spirit
of Venturing for those who do not have the karmic propensity to inactively
cultivate the genuine Spirit of Awakening directly: while visualizing the
objects of refuge in the space in front of you, think, 'I shall deliver and
liberate all sentient beings of the three worlds from the ocean of suffering of
mundane existence and bring them to the state of omniscience.' With that
_______________
40 That is, such talk is like giving a boy's name to a fetus whose gender
remains unknown.
Page 138
thought, commit yourself to accomplishing the great welfare of sentient beings
by way of the Four Immeasurables, namely compassion, loving kindness,
empathetic joy, and equanimity. In particular, the thought, 'I shall practice
the meditation and recitation of the supreme, chosen deity!' is called the
Spirit of Aspiring for Awakening; and steadfastly engaging in the meditation
and recitation of the deity as a profound means of simultaneously accomplishing
the Six Perfections for the sake of all sentient beings is called the Spirit of
Venturing towards Awakening. [205] Know that to be the means by which your
entire practice of Dharma will serve as a cause of perfect, great Awakening.
The graha, vighna, bhuta, the great pisaca who obscures the face of suchness,
reality-itself, and creates cycle of existence of the three worlds is ego-
grasping. The positive, good thoughts that emerge from that are devas and
raksasas; all negative, bad thoughts are great, evil pisacas; and the subtle
configurations of thoughts of craving and attachment are the class of vighnas
who are the masters and mistresses of adversity. Thus, since not even an iota
of any other pisaca or graha exists, even if you do things to expel and
liberate them, you will not attain the fruition of liberation. Therefore, the
unconquerable, wrathful being who severs the vital root of self-concepts and
the cycle of existence is empty awareness, which appears in the form of the
Vajraheruka of hatred and his messengers and servants. By doing so, the rudra
of the view of the self is expelled into the absolute nature, and the root of
mundane existence is utterly expunged. As the great wisdom that realizes
identitylessness arises as the universal splendor of mundane existence and
peace, appearances arise as ornaments of awareness. Apart from the
manifestation of divine embodiments of the original ground, there is no
expulsion of vighnas. Thus, [206} take that fact as the basis.
Page 139
In accordance with the ways of the cycle of existence, before one first moves
to a region, one makes it safe by expelling harmful beings such as enemies,
thieves, and dangerous carnivores, and only thereafter does one settle on the
land. Likewise, with yourself in the role of an illusionist, you create the
illusion-like recipient of your generosity, as if he were an observer of the
embodiments of your thoughts. Over the white offerings, red offerings, and
ransom-tormas, which are like illusory substances, you recite the purifying
mantras and increasing mantras, which are illusory mantras for substances.
Consequently, with illusion-like samadhi you dedicate those rejected
appearances of sensory objects, like reflections of planets and stars, to the
water-vessel-like expanse of the six faculties of those beings. Thus, this
visualization for paying off all one's debts, dispelling all one's arrears, and
becoming reconciled with those who are hostile is praised as the best means of
overcoming all adversities and obstacles.
Then you instantaneously imagine yourself as a ferocious, majestic, terrifying,
wrathful being of primordial wisdom. From your body, speech, and mind billows
of fire, foul odors, assemblies of wrathful beings, iron scorpions, weapons,
and various substances used by sorcerers are emanated like hail. As a result,
all malevolent grahas, vighnas, and vinayakas are totally, helplessly cast out
into the darkness behind the outermost, black iron fence, like paper blown away
by the wind, where they are dazed and confused. Imagining that is called the
visualization for expelling vighnas, and that is taught as a method for
preventing the occurrence of obstacles in one's meditation on the deities and
mandala that one is actualizing. By regarding thoughts as demons, that is a
profound technique for getting rid of hindrances that might destroy emerging
siddhis.
With respect to the wheel of protection, the actual wheel of protection is as
follows: by knowing that the whole of samsara and nirvana is a display of the
Page 140
Spirit of Awakening, one ascertains that all violent beings and objects of
their violence are originally not established. Thus, all vighnas and malevolent
beings are released right where they are, making them disappear. That is called
the ultimate wheel of protection or the self-arising, pristine wheel of
protection.
Here are practical teachings for those who know that, but do not have
confidence when it comes to their sensory activities: withdraw the small
wrathful beings and sorcerer's substances that demarcate the emanated
apparitions of enlightened activity .Thus, all regions above, below, and in
between are sealed closed with no gaps, [208]and they appear in the aspect of a
celestial mansion of a blazing wheel, of the essential nature of the primordial
wisdom of absolute nature of reality. On its outer periphery, the essential
nature of mirror-like primordial wisdom appears in the aspect of a celestial
mansion of blazing vajras. On its outer periphery, the essential nature of the
primordial wisdom of equality appears in the aspect of a celestial mansion of
blazing jewels. On its outer periphery , the essential nature of the primordial
wisdom of discernment appears in the aspect of a celestial mansion of blazing
lotuses. On its outer periphery, the essential nature of the primordial wisdom
of accomplishment appears in the aspect of a celestial mansion of blazing
swastikas. On its outer periphery is a blazing mountain of primordial wisdom
and a fence of a mass of fire. On its periphery is a great celestial mansion of
a dark vajra-wind and razor-sharp blades. On its periphery is fence of crashing
waves of a vajra-river.
Visualizing that definitely puts an end to all grahas and vighnas that arise
from the projections of thoughts. That is like constructing a fence to protect
one from enemies. Determining the nature of all impure, deluded mental states
and appearances, then accurately recognizing the mode of existence, or mode of
being, of the ground puts a stop to misleading confusion. All non-realization
and
Page 141
misconceptions are a great flaw for the practice of meditation, so there is a
real blessing in first gaining knowledge and realization. [209]
For that purpose, in accordance with the ways of the cycle of existence, before
someone moves into a new house, one clears out all its flaws, then cleans it so
that it is comfortable, beautiful, well decorated, and attractive. Likewise,
with the force of your great faith, admiration, and reverence, emanate rays of
light from your heart, arousing the minds of the jinas and jinaputras.
Consequently, rupakayas are created from the absolute nature of reality, and
all empowerments, blessings, and siddhis dissolve into you, your environment,
your place of practice, and your practice substances in the aspect of mounds of
five-colored lights and masses of rainbow-clouds, together with enlightened
bodies in the form of subtle mudras, enlightened speech in the form of various
seed-syllables, and enlightened minds in the form of various hand-symbols. As a
result, repeatedly imagine your environment being blessed as the naturally
appearing, real Akanista, your house as a palace created from primordial
wisdom, your practice substances as ambrosia, and your body, speech, and mind
to be of the nature of the three vajras. It is appropriate to actualize your
place of practice, your house, your practice substances, and yourself as
deities and the mandala.
The manifestation of the dharmakaya, free of the extremes of conceptual
elaboration, the spontaneously present, absolute nature, and self-arisen nature
of the embodiments and displays of primordial wisdom [210] is the ultimate
blessing of the offerings. The natural appearances of sensory objects appearing
as objects from the perspective of conventional, deluded sentient beings are
sealed with the embodiments and great primordial wisdoms. Imagine that infinite
clouds of offerings, including the outer seven enjoyments and the inner five
sensory objects, appear in the nature of unceasing streams of displays of a
Page 142
circles of ornaments in all the self-appearing mandalas of primordial wisdoms.
In particular, imagine that the five poisons melt into the essential nature of
the five primordial wisdoms, the medicine swirls about as an ocean of ambrosia
of the primordial wisdom of bliss and emptiness, and visualize the cosmos as a
red baling torma in which the nutritive essence is synthesized, acting as a
source of all desirable things. Imagine the attachment of the three realms of
the cycle of existence melting into the essential nature of the bliss of
detachment, appearing as a boiling ocean of great wish-fulfilling, red rakta
and so forth, offered to each of the deities, and blessed with the essence of
the three vajras. And imagine that the arranged objects, like illusory
substances, each expresses its own mantra, like illusory mantras, such that
they are of the nature of those appearances.
The projection of the offering substances is called the space-treasury samadhi.
[211] Until the ego-grasping consciousness ceases, these occurrences of
unbroken streams of appearances of sensory objects are transformed into clouds
of offerings. As an analogy, by imprinting mantras of illusory substances upon
the realm of limpid, clear sky, various appearances of sensory objects arise
for the spectators. Likewise, the sensory faculties of the recipients of the
offerings and gifts are like the limpid, clear sky; the substances that have
been set out are like illusory substances; one's thoughts are like illusory
thoughts; the recipients of the offerings and gifts are like a crowd of
spectators; and all the enjoyments are visualized as if they were illusory
wish-fulfilling appearances. That is illusion like samadhi.
Illusion-like samadhi does not occur merely with such visualization, rather it
is within the experiential domain of people who have ascertained samsara and
nirvana to be self-appearing. Know that those who do not recognize that are
conceptually visualizing objects to their minds. For all of that, ultimately
take as the basis the way of manifesting the awareness that is present as the
ground; and
Page 143
conventionally, the preliminary practices of the stage of generation are taught
in accordance with the ways of the cycle of existence. Moreover, know that the
methods for proceeding along the path are taught with respect to the
characteristics of the ground itself, [212] and they are not objects other than
that.
Now in the main practice, before meditating on the foundation, namely, the
buddha-field and palace, and those who reside in it, namely, the deities, the
impure, karmic eon must be dissolved into the absolute nature and be brought
forth in the appearance of pure deities of primordial wisdom. As an analogy,
dream appearances and waking appearances do not both appear simultaneously; and
the human realm and hell realm cannot possible emerge at the same time.
Likewise, the impure appearances of the cycle of existence and the buddha-field
of primordial wisdom deities cannot possibly exist simultaneously.
First, as the phenomenal inanimate universe, its inhabiting, animate sentient
beings, and the appearances of the five sensory objects are all dissolved into
the absolute nature as illusory apparitions, imagine that they are dissolved
into the nature of emptiness. The manifestation of this mode of existence of
suchness, reality-itself, is called the samadhi of suchness. Those who do not
know the nature and mode of being of emptiness merely impose some kind of
emptiness upon that which is not empty, and the samadhi of suchness is not
directly manifested. The real samadhi of suchness is in the realm of experience
solely of contemplatives who have realized the view of emptiness. [213]
Again, from the manifestation of all-pervasive primordial wisdom and the mode
of being of the ground all phenomena included within samsara and nirvana
manifest as displays of great spontaneous presence, like planets and stars in
the ocean. That total appearance is called the samadhi of all appearances. This
is in the realm of experience solely of contemplatives who have identified the
dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground. Others' cultivation of
compassion
Page 144
by mentally focusing on sentient beings entails thinking about a referent, and
the actual samadhi of all appearances does not become manifest. Therefore,
recognize that one is merely being substituted for the other.
Then in an instant, like rainbows suddenly appearing in the sky where none
exist, and like heavenly bodies suddenly appearing in a pool of water where
none exist, from the absolute nature of all-pervasive reality-itself, free of
conceptual elaboration, the visualization of awareness as a causal, white
syllable om, blazing with light and light-rays causes the emergence of the
entire foundational mandala and those who reside in it. The former two41 are
primordial wisdoms that are aware of emptiness and that transcend the
conceptual objects of the intellect. The final visualization consists of
apparitions involving referents and the clarity of their presence.
O Vidyavajra, [214] as in the explanation of the gradual formation of the
elements due to the wind of the eon, visualize the syllable e emerging from the
om and transforming into the nature of empty, clear, all-pervasive space. Yam
emerges and transforms into an air mandala as the underlying ground, in the
shape of a vajra-swastika. Bam emerges and transforms into an ocean, of the
nature of limpid, clear, contamination-free water, in the shape of a swirling
sphere. From the emanation of lam, a vast, broad, square-shaped golden ground
appears. Ram emerges and transforms into the nature of warmth in the
composition of all the above, bearing the aspect of warmth and present as a
semi-circle.
All those appear but do not inherently exist, like the moon in water and a
rainbow. Know them to be mere appearances, empty and unreal like the expanse of
space. Again, upon the golden ground of great power Sum is emanated, such that
the entire ground shines like lapis-lazuli, blazing with
_______________
41 Namely, the samadhi of suchness and the samadhi of all appearances.
Page 145
limpid, clear light. It is free of all rough things such as jagged mountains,
pebbles, and thorny trees. Its vast, broad surface is smooth and level like the
face of a mirror, such that when pressed down, it sinks four finger-widths, and
when the pressure is removed, it springs back four finger-widths. Aromatic
fragrances waft across grassy hills covered with medicinal plants. [215] The
ground is completely covered with various beautiful, lovely lotus flowers,
blazing, clear, shimmering, limpid in colors of deep blue, white, yellow, red,
and green. The sky is criss-crossed with checkered patterns of rainbow lights,
and the cardinal and intermediate directions are covered with masses of rainbow
clouds. In that expanse all the assemblies of apparitional viras and yoginis of
primordial wisdom perform beautiful dances, sing lovely melodies and play
various musical instruments. In the intervening space various offering
goddesses present myriads of clouds of offerings and make obeisance. In the
eight cardinal and intermediate directions of the ground are eight great
oceans. On their shores are jewel-pebbles, golden sand, and lush turquoise
meadows.
There dwells an inconceivable variety of innumerable, sweet-voiced birds
including the golden goose, who is the king of birds, blue-headed wild ducks,
katika birds, talking parrots, cuckoos, pheasants, [216] hazel hens, and
sparrows. The attractive birds include ducks, eagles, hoopoes, celestial birds
with voices like chiming bells, and kritipa birds having the form of golden
vajras. They are white like the color of a conch and of silver, yellow like the
color of gold and amber, red like the color of coral and ruby, green like the
color of turquoise and emerald, dark blue like the color of lapis-lazuli and
sapphire, and blue like the color of vairata. Those and other birds are of
pleasing colors and beautiful forms, singing lovely songs, engaging in charming
play, alighting upon wish-fulfilling trees, and circling about in the ocean.
Page 146
In addition, various apparitional, beautifully formed deer show their
dexterity in enchanting, lovely play, and they listen to the Dharma. In the
center is a pond of ambrosial water endowed with eight qualities surrounded by
a swirling moat and encircled by a metal fence composed of seven types of
precious substances. By drinking it thirst and hunger are dispelled, and merely
by experiencing the water's aroma, [217] all pains of various illnesses are
removed and untainted bliss is produced.
In its center is a wonderful garden, free of any kind of discord, in the center
of which is a hum. From this emerges a palace. Its eastern face is white and
luminous like crystal, symbolizing mirror-like primordial wisdom; its southern
face is golden yellow, symbolizing the primordial wisdom of equality; its
western face is ruby-red, symbolizing the primordial wisdom of discernment; its
northern face is sapphire-green,42 symbolizing the primordial wisdom of
accomplishment; and its center is the blue of lapis-lazuli, symbolizing the
primordial wisdom of the absolute nature of reality.
On its eastern side is a circular door of great compassion, symbolizing the
spontaneous enlightened activity of pacification; on its southern side is a
square door of great loving kindness, symbolizing the spontaneous enlightened
activity of increase; on its western side is a semi-circular door of great
empathetic joy, symbolizing the spontaneous enlightened activity of power; and
on its northern side is a triangular door of great equanimity, symbolizing the
spontaneous enlightened activity of ferocity .
It has four comers symbolizing the four embodiments. On the outside it is
surrounded by protective celestial mansions of the five primordial wisdoms and
the five spontaneously present embodiments. On top of the palace are vase-
platforms, vases, awnings, [218] wheels of Dharma, fine parasols, top-ornaments
_______________
42 One would expect this to be emerald-green, but the text reads "sapphire."
Page 147
of the sun, moon, and a jewel, laced curtains, bells, and spherical bells from
which sounds of Dharma are produced. The jeweled door frames, portals, and
steps and so forth are adorned with immeasurable, palatial qualities. On the
four sides the light from the sun and moon through the windows strikes the
crystal windowpanes, covering them with rainbows and orbs during the daytime
and with clear light during the nighttime. The mere sight of this is
enchanting, and simply by entering within, displays of the embodiments and
primordial wisdoms become manifest.
In the center of the palace is a jeweled throne of great height and beauty,
symbolizing transcendence beyond mundane existence. It is held up by eight
lions, symbolizing the purity of the eight collections of consciousness, and
upon it descends a white, causal seed-syllable om from which rays of light
radiate upwards. They make immeasurable offerings to all the jinas and
jinaputras. Fully arousing the mind-streams of the chosen deities, all the
empowerments, blessings, and siddhis of their bodies, speech, minds, qualities,
and enlightened activities, together with all the qualities of their primordial
wisdom of knowledge, mercy, and power, are drawn in like a convergence of
rainbow clouds; and they dissolve into the om. Rays of light radiate downwards,
purifying the mind-streams of all sentient beings of the three realms, and, as
if forcefully arousing them from sleep, bringing them to a state in which there
is no delusion. [219] At the same time as the rays of light are retracted, the
life and merit of all sentient beings and all the splendor and vital essence of
the animate and inanimate universe are retracted and dissolve into the om.
The om transforms into oneself as the great Bhagavan Vairocana, whose body is
white in color like a snow-mountain, symbolizing his freedom from the taints of
habitual propensities. He has one face, symbolizing the sole bindu of the
dharmakaya. His right eye symbolizes the primordial wisdom of knowing reality
Page 148
as it is, and his left eye symbolizes the primordial wisdom of seeing the full
range of phenomena. His right ear symbolizes ultimate reality, and his left ear
symbolizes conventional reality .His right nostril symbolizes the dharmakaya
for his own sake, and his left nostril symbolizes the rupakaya for the sake of
others. His mouth symbolizes the great bliss of equality, his teeth symbolize
the perfection of the mandala of pacification, and his tongue symbolizes the
even union of samsara and nirvana. His right arm symbolizes the skillful means
of great bliss, and his left arm symbolizes the wisdom of great emptiness. The
ten fingers of his hands symbolize the five embodiments and the five primordial
wisdoms. His right leg symbolizes his not abiding in the extreme of mundane
existence, and his left leg symbolizes his not abiding in the extreme of peace.
[220] His ten toes symbolize the perfection of the five buddha classes and five
consorts. His twelve joints, which are pliant and flexible like the branches of
a vine, symbolize the purification of the twelve links of dependent
origination. His entire body symbolizes his spontaneous qualities. His body
hair, blazing with the light of primordial wisdom, symbolizes the 84,000
collections of the Dharma. The hair of his head, tied in a bun, symbolizes his
never having been subject to delusion. The dangling locks of his hair flowing
down his back symbolize his caring for animate beings. His legs crossed in the
vajra-position symbolize that he is unmoved throughout the three times. His two
hands in the mudra of supreme Awakening43 symbolize that samsara and nirvana
are displays of great Awakening. The thousand-spoked, golden wheel that he
holds symbolizes the perfection of the circle of primordial wisdom of the minds
of all the jinas of the three times. All the Sambhoga apparel with which he is
adorned symbolize his love for animate beings. The light and rainbows that
surround him symbolize his perfection of all the embodiments and primordial
wisdoms.
_______________
43 This mudra is one in which the hands touch at the fingertips, with the palms
facing up.
Page149
In the east the buddha-field called Abhirati the entire ground appears like
precious crystal. In the south the buddha-field called Srimat the entire ground
appears in the aspect of gold. [221] In the west the buddha-field called
Sukhavati the entire ground appears in the aspect of ruby. In the north the
buddha-field called Karmaprapurana appears with blazing light in the aspect of
sapphire.
In the east the Tathagata Aksobhyavajra arises from hum, the blue- black color
of his body symbolizing the unborn absolute nature of reality. He presses upon
the ground, blocking the entrance to the three realms, and he holds a vajra
symbolizing indestructible ultimate reality. In the south Ratnasambhava arises
from tram, the yellow color of his body symbolizing his perfection of excellent
qualities and enjoyments. The mudra of supreme generosity symbolizes his
bestowal of supreme, eternal joy to all animate beings, and he holds a precious
jewel symbolizing his bestowal of the glory of service and joy to all pitiable
animate beings. In the west Amitabha arises from hrih, the red color of his
body symbolizing his mastery over the whole of samsara and nirvana. His two
hands in the mudra of meditative equipoise symbolize the display of samsara and
nirvana as great pure equality; and upon them the lotus he holds symbolizes the
complete expansion of the mystery of the Awakened mind, great bliss. In the
north Amoghasiddhi arises from ah, the green color of his body symbolizing
[222] his synthesis and perfection of all the circles of ornaments of the
embodiments, primordial wisdoms, excellent qualities, and inexhaustible
enlightened activities. His mudra of giving is the great protection of
fearlessness for animate beings, and he holds a variegated vajra symbolizing
his training of disciples by means of the four kinds of enlightened activities.
Whichever one of those deities you take as your principle being to be
actualized, imagine and actualize the set of five for each one. Know that this
Page 150
symbolizes implicitly the simultaneous perfection of the five embodiments and
the five primordial wisdoms in the dharmakaya, the sugatagarbha.
Thus, all the imagined deities are embodiments that appear but do not
inherently exist, like rainbows in the sky, like the forms of the moon in
water, like reflections in a mirror, and like limpid, clear water, purified of
all contamination. In the absolute nature all the embodiments and buddha-
fields of all the jinas naturally arise like bright heavenly bodies in the
ocean, and they are visualized in the aspect of masses of light.
Likewise, with respect to the wrathful mandala, the animate and inanimate
universe, together with one's own body, aggregates, elements, and sense-bases
disappear into the realm of space, the great emptiness of reality-itself, like
a dream vanishing into the absolute nature. Then rest in mastery of the
primordial wisdom of emptiness. [223] Once again rest in meditative equipoise
in a state in which clear, primordial wisdom becomes manifest. At the end
visualize awareness as a causal, flaming, blue-black syllable hum, which is an
apparition of the primordial wisdom of great all-pervasive compassion. When you
encounter the mundane dying process, which is to be purified, the outer
appearances of the inanimate universe, the inner, animate sentient beings, and
all the intermediate appearances of the five sensory objects dissolve into
clear emptiness. Then expansively resting in that for awhile is the phase of
the dissolution of mundane existence into the total-ground. By taking as the
path the great, absolute nature of the ground-emptiness, which is the purifier
that will be recognized at the time of the fruition, you will gain mastery of
reality-itself, suchness. Thus, familiarization in this is of the utmost
importance.
When the dying process that is to be purified is transferred to the clear
light, this is like the condition of the autumn sky when it is not veiled in
white by the contaminating condition of the sun, nor veiled in black by
darkness, and
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
