


open source Google Analytics
[Home] [Home_B] [Evolve] [Viva!] [Site_Map] [Site_Map_A] [Site_Map_B] [Bulletin
               Board] [SPA] [Child_of_Fortune]  [Search] [ABOL]


            [search                                      ] [Search]

                                          THE VAJRA HEART TANTRA
Page 227
Dharma, emptiness goes awry, and there is no remedy for that. Thus, it is
crucial for you to know that.
In summary, at all times and in all situations let your behavior be calm,
subdued, and conscientious, and continually guard your pledges and vows. [329]
Avoid sinful, nonvirtuous deeds as if they were poison. With no other virtue to
practice, apply yourself assiduously to the profound view and meditation,
striving in this essential practice for your whole life. By constraining your
mind as if you had come into the presence of the premier of judges, recognize
the importance of restraint. Until you reach the state of the extinction into
reality-itself, you must correctly avoid the bad and adopt the good in terms of
actions and their consequences. Until you attain the four types of fearless
confidence that are indications of having attained liberation, suffering will
result from nonvirtue, and joy will result from virtue. This can be known by
investigating and carefully reflecting upon the nature of the cycle of
existence and delusion as you have been constantly addicted to experiencing the
cycle of delusive experiences during beginningless lifetimes right up to the
present. Even though you have an ocean of knowledge acquired from hearing, if
you have no practice of profound meditation, you are like a person who returns
empty-handed from an island of jewels, and you will die as an ordinary person
and continue wandering in the cycle of existence. Therefore, with diligent
meditation apply yourself to the essential practice.
Thus, when you are engaging in practice, whether an unprecedented, soothing
sense of bliss arises, or a pristine sense of clarity , or a nebulous
nonconceptuality, if you take this to be genuine meditation and cling to it as
the fulfillment of your hopes, or if you regard those as areas of danger and
block them, or if you alter them with you mind, such practice entailing hopes
and fears will lead you astray. In contrast, once you have recognized the
nature of
Page 228
existence of meditative experiences, by letting them be in their own state,
without attachment, craving, rejection, or affirmation, they will vanish
altogether, like mist disappearing into the sky, and the primordial wisdom of
awareness will become manifest.
You may perceive various disagreeable forms of gods and demons, different kinds
of pleasant and unpleasant sounds, various foul odors, disagreeable tastes,
various kinds of tactile sensation:;, and you may have nightmares and wake up
at times in a panic. Those experiences may bring forth different types of
distress in your heart and mind. Due to your diet, environment, or trauma,
illnesses may arise, and merely as a result of coming into contact with soil,
rocks, wood, or weapons, you may come down with afflictions difficult to heal.
Various bad omens, such as sores, leprosy, or ulcers, may occur as apparitions
created by gods or demons, which arise from external sources. Any of the four
hundred and four classes of illnesses of wind, bile, phlegm and combinations of
them may arise, and--as if the entire might and strength of your mind had
seeped away into them--inexpressible suffering may occur .Those are called
physical illnesses, which arise from within.
With respect to objects of the mind, you may experience happiness, attachment,
hatred, craving, unbearable suffering, delight, clinging to the experience of
emptiness and luminosity, a sense of sheer vacuity in which appearances and the
mind cease, paranoia that everything you see or feel is out to harm you, or the
pride of thinking, 'There is no contemplative on earth who has a view and
meditation like mine.' Under the influence of anger and malice, you may disturb
the minds of others, and afterwards feel remorse. You may feel that everything
you have done is wonderful, and consequently feel free to do whatever you like.
Such indeterminate experiences of joy and sorrow are called joys and sorrows
due to the mysterious impulses in the mind. Know that
Page 229
all such sensations are deceptive experiences that occur as signs along the
path; [332] and, without attachment, craving, rejection, affirmation, hope,
fear, or modification, leave them as they are. By so doing, they will release
themselves. Hold this knowledge to be of the highest importance.
If your meditative experience leads to illness and you compound this by
interpreting this as being due to demonic influence, no matter how much you
devote yourself to magic rituals for dispelling obstacles, or to medical
treatment, that will only harm you, without bringing any benefit. However much
you try, you will not get even the slightest bit of benefit. Eventually, if the
sentry of identifying the meditative experience is lost, you will go insane,
pass out, faint, or become as ignorant as an animal, or this might lead to your
own death. In the past there have been many faithful students who kept their
pledges and vows, and there have always been spiritual mentors who became
siddhas, so they knew the various dispositions and faculties of specific
students; and they led them to the state of the Jina Vajradhara in one lifetime
and with one body. Even when they are not led astray by anyone, nowadays
students invariably fail to keep their pledges, they have little faith or
reverence, and they are barbaric and prone to false views. Blind teachers
hanker after meditative experiences and give teachings and make their students
meditate so that they objectify and cling onto views and meditation. [333]
Consequently, instead of identifying the occurrences of mere pleasure and pain
and comfort and distress as meditative experiences, due to their ignorance of
the differences between experiences that arise from external and internal
sources, they say they are due to demonic influences, thus misleading their own
students. Such illegitimate teachers are certain to become maras for their
students.
Due to specific dispositions and faculties, experiences may arise solely from
external sources without any internal source; they may arise solely from
Page 230
internal sources and from no external or mysterious sources; or they may arise
solely from mysterious sources and from no external or internal source. Thus,
it is especially crucial that you must know how to distinguish among those.
Nowadays, during this degenerate era, when the teachings of the Buddha have
fallen into decline, some teachers say to sustain awareness on the movements
[of the mind], and since even they have no experience or realization from that,
the lives of all such teachers and their disciples are vainly spent doing that,
and they die as ordinary people. That has happened many times. Some teachers
remain absorbed in a relaxed, gentle state of joy and tell others this is the
culmination of the view and meditation; and they get stuck there. Other
teachers experience a sense of luminosity, seeing gods and demons, [334] and
becoming absorbed in a steady vividness of the mind and appearances, they teach
that to others. Some become absorbed in a pristine, nonconceptual sense of
emptiness, in which there is no memory or appearances, and they teach that to
others. Others become absorbed in an unceasing, unstructured state of
consciousness, and teach this to others as the best view and meditation. Those
who identify the view and meditation in those ways do not rise above the three
realms, for they have not realized the view of emptiness. They are imprisoned
by that failing, and consequently they do not see the grounds or paths of
liberation and omniscience. Some people idle away their whole lives by being
addicted to ragged books and oral explanations, so when death suddenly comes
upon them, they lack even the slightest confidence of fearlessness. Those who
become fixated solely on hearing and teaching take pride in their affluence and
status in this life. As for those who become entranced for their whole lives by
delusive appearances and mental states and those who become captivated by the
knowledge gained from hearing and by teaching, there is no qualitative
difference in the objects of their craving, just as there is no difference
between
Page 231
being bound by gold fetters and rope fetters. Everything that you cling to acts
solely as a cause for the bondage of your own mind-stream.
First you should come to know the critical points and narratives concerning the
vast view and meditation. Finally, you should sincerely dedicate yourself to
essential practice, [335] and you will reach the state of liberation without
getting caught up in pitfalls and errors. In that way, hearing strikes the
core. Otherwise, if your pride and sense of self-importance increase due to
hearing and understanding through hearing teachings many times, everything you
see will become an object for false views and invalid denials and
superimpositions; not even the slightest faith or reverence will arise in your
mind-stream; and you will be filled with the pomposity of thinking, 'There's
not a single person like me!' With contempt for others, you will abuse them,
and upon hearing or witnessing other renowned people teaching, the power of
fierce pride will arise, and out of a sense of jealousy, you will superimpose
faults that are not present and deny excellent qualities that are present. For
such people, learning turns into poison, and the foundation is laid for rebirth
in a miserable state of existence.
Therefore, from the very beginning scrutinize such teachers and avoid them. Do
not depend upon them! Regard as a buddha any spiritual mentor from whom you
have received as little as a single verse of instruction, and do nothing to
displease him even for an instant. If you do displease your spiritual mentor,
you are abandoning all the buddhas of the three times, so no meditative
experiences, realizations, or excellent qualities will arise in your mind-
stream. Even if merit is accumulated, its fruits will not arise. Even if you
engage in practices involving deities and their mandalas, {336] you will
actualize nothing but demons and spirits who cause you to break your pledges.
The seeds of liberation will dry up and will not bear fruit. The trunk of
omniscience will rot
Page 232
and its leaves will not grow. Once you have received empowerment and three
lines of guidance, even from a non-Buddhist Samkhya, revere him as the foremost
of spiritual mentors and never withdraw your reverence.
When you are sitting, you may take refuge in the [Three] Jewels by imagining
your spiritual mentor on the crown of your head. When you are walking,
visualize your mentor on your right shoulder and imagine you are
circumambulating him. That is far superior to circumambulating all the jinas of
the three times. When you are partaking of food and drink, visualize your
mentor at your throat, and eat your food, imagining it to be ambrosia. Thus,
whatever you eat will become a ganacakra offering and a fire offering. When you
are meditating and when you are lying down, visualize your mentor at your
heart, and by merging your mind with his, you will experience the nonconceptual
primordial wisdom of reality-itself; and extraordinary realizations will arise
in your mind-stream. When you are practicing, if you imagine [yourself] as
being of the nature of the deity and protector, you will not falsely reify the
stage of generation, and a myriad of supreme and common siddhis and enlightened
activities will arise. Likewise, if you depend upon a sublime spiritual mentor
without violating [this relationship], that is the supreme gist of spiritual
conduct."
Bodhisattva Vidyavajra then commented, [337] "If all the paths and fruitions
were originally, primordially, completely present in awareness, all sentient
beings would certainly have come to the view of the Great Perfection. So what
is the difference [between buddhas and sentient beings]? May the Teacher
explain!"
He replied, "O Vidyavajra, it is not as you say. There is no difference between
all the buddhas and all sentient beings other than that the former are
Page 233
aware and the latter are not. Thus, all sentient beings apprehend their own
appearances as being other than themselves and thus become deluded. All the
buddhas perceive the pure equality of samsara and nirvana, and thus became
Awakened. Therefore, awareness is the great, original, primordially pure
ground, and it recognizes samsara and nirvana as displays of pure equality .The
reality-itself of awareness to which that character manifests is inconceivable
primordial wisdom."
Bodhisattva Vidyavajra then commented, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, if one takes the
primordial wisdom of awareness as the path, how is liberation attained? What
advantages are there in that?"
He replied, "O Vidyavajra, once you have gained mastery over the primordial
wisdom of awareness, if you meditate uninterruptedly, you will attain
liberation in this life and with this body, and you will become a buddha. If
one person who had accumulated much karma from the five deeds of immediate
retribution [338] and another person who had practiced the stage of generation
for his whole life were both to identify awareness simultaneously and meditate
upon it--since the mind-itself is not contaminated by faults or virtues--one
would not become enlightened even an instant before the other. That is a solemn
promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had engaged in evil, non-virtuous conduct in this life and
another who had accumulated merit his whole life were both to identify
awareness simultaneously and practice that--since awareness transcends cause
and effect--one would not become enlightened even an instant before the other.
That is a solemn promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had cultivated profound meditative stabilization in this life
and another who had fallen under the influence of distraction his whole life
were both to identify awareness simultaneously and practice that--since there
Page 234
are no distinctions of good or bad in awareness--one would not become
enlightened even an instant before the other. That is a solemn promise of
myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had trained in the Generation of the Spirit and dedicated
himself to the welfare of others his whole life and another who had applied
himself to deeds injurious to others his whole life were both to identify the
nature of awareness simultaneously and practice that--since awareness is
liberated in itself, without reference to activities--there would not be the
slightest difference in their attainment of enlightenment. That is a solemn
promise of myself, Samantabhadra. [339]
If one person who had tried to control his mind-stream his whole life and
another who had applied himself to the ten non-virtues were both to identify
awareness simultaneously and practice that--since awareness does not rely upon
other contributing conditions--one would not become enlightened even an instant
before the other. That is a solemn promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had practiced generosity his whole life and another who had
been a thief his entire life were both to identify the nature of awareness
simultaneously--since there is nothing that can help or harm awareness- one
would not become enlightened even an instant before the other. That is a solemn
promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one great sinner who had killed a hundred people and a hundred horses in a
single lifetime and another who had devoted his whole life to circumambulations
and prostrations were both simultaneously to identify ground-awareness, the
great liberation from extremes, and to devote themselves to essential practice-
-since the primordial wisdom of awareness is devoid of modification or
transformation--there would not be even the slightest
Page 235
difference in their attaining enlightenment together. That is a solemn promise
of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had spent his life reciting the words of the Buddha and the
commentaries and another who had broken his oaths; and lied his whole life were
to identify awareness and practice that, the state of liberation would not be
even the slightest bit further away for one than for the other. That is a
solemn promise of myself, Samantabhadra. [340]
If one person who had reached the Joyous bodhisattva ground by training and
progressing along the grounds and paths and another who had not entered this
spiritual vehicle in this life were both to identify for themselves the ground
awareness that is free of extremes and were to practice and cultivate that
together, one would not become enlightened even an instant before the other.
That is a solemn promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had acquainted himself throughout his life to the path
awareness and another who had never seen the entrance to Dharma were
simultaneously to identify the ground-awareness, the great freedom from
extremes, and were to relentlessly practice that, there would not be even the
slightest difference in the time it would take them to attain enlightenment.
That is a solemn promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
If one person who had dedicated his whole life to constructing temples and
stupas and to protecting the lives of others and another who had devoted his
entire life to being a butcher, taking the lives of others, were both to
identify the ground-awareness, the great freedom from extremes, and
persistently apply themselves to practicing that, there would not be even the
slightest difference in their attainment of enlightenment. That is a solemn
promise of myself, Samantabhadra.
Page 236
The point of all that is that all delusive activities, like actions in a dream,
are never performed, but due to clinging to the true existence of the mere
appearances of activities, that which does not exist is seen to exist. Since
those actions neither help nor harm the ground-awareness, the great freedom
from extremes, [341] they make no difference with respect to attaining
enlightenment. There is no object that is benefited by good deeds, so, like
space, they do not exist as something good. There is no object that is harmed
by bad conduct, so they are of the nature of space--objectless, intangible, and
all-pervasive. The reason for their appearing to exist in this way is that, due
to ignorance of the ground, which is your own mode of existence, you wander
endlessly in the cycle of existence solely as a result of extraspective
clinging to other objects. Thus, once you have become aware of this situation,
you may fathom the depths of your own being, gain mastery over yourself and
that is spiritual Awakening. This is like an insane person regaining his
senses. In that analogy, until you come to your senses and gain control of your
mind, whatever you do, there is no way for it to be anything but insane
conduct. Likewise, until awareness identifies itself and fathoms its own
depths, there is no way that good or bad deeds can make you into a buddha. So
know this!
O Vidyavajra, the advantages of that are inexpressible! [342] The advantages of
identifying awareness and uninterruptedly meditating on that for six months are
a hundred, a thousand, even ten thousand times greater than the advantages of
physical prostrations and circumambulations for purify obscurations. The
advantages of identifying the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the
ground, and uninterruptedly meditating on that for six months are a hundred, a
thousand, even ten thousand times greater than the advantages of devoting
yourself to great acts of generosity for your whole life. The advantages of
identifying the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the
Page 237
ground, and uninterruptedly meditating on that for six months are far more than
ten or a hundred thousand times greater than the advantages of filling this
great galaxy with stupas and holy images made of the seven types of precious
substances and making offerings and devotions to them. The merit of identifying
the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and practicing
that for six months is ten or a hundred thousand times greater than the merit
of spending your whole life reading the sutras and reciting mantras and so
forth. If you identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the
ground, and practice that for six months, the advantages are a hundred, a
thousand, or even ten thousand times greater than the advantages of practicing
the profound stage of generation your whole life. If you identify within
yourself the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and
practice that uninterruptedly for six months, [343] the merit is far more than
a hundred or a thousand times that of generating the Spirit of Awakening for
all sentient beings and devoting yourself to their welfare your whole life. If
you identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and
practice that uninterruptedly, day and night, for six months, the merit is far
more than ten or a hundred thousand times greater than that of constantly
applying yourself to the ten virtuous deeds for your whole life.
O Vidyavajra, if you wish to release all the sentient beings of the three
realms simultaneously from the ocean of suffering of mundane existence,
identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and
practice that uninterruptedly. If you wish to fathom all the inexhaustible
ornamental wheels of the bodies, speech, minds, qualities, and enlightened
activities of the jinas and jinaputras of the three times, identify the
dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and practice that
uninterruptedly. If you wish to perfectly attain all the grounds, paths, and
qualities of the nine successive yanas,
Page 238
identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and
practice that uninterruptedly. If you wish to manifestly attain the state of
the dharmakaya [344] the original protector, in this very life and with this
very body, identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the
ground, and practice that uninterruptedly. If you wish to revel in the great,
even purity of samsara and nirvana, identify the dharmakaya, the awareness that
is present as the ground, and practice that uninterruptedly. If you wish to
completely perfect the qualities of the Ten Perfections, identify the
dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground, and practice that
uninterruptedly. If you wish to simultaneously perfect all the primordial
wisdoms of knowledge, compassion, and power, identify the dharmakaya, the
awareness that is present as the ground, and practice that uninterruptedly.
Even if you do not meditate on the excellences of that which has been
identified, you will undoubtedly become enlightened within seven lifetimes.
Know that the advantages of identifying awareness for yourself are ten or a
hundred million times superior to those of having a vision of three thousand
buddhas and hearing their teachings all at once.
O Vidyavajra, the vast, one taste of the bhaga of the mystery of the mind of
all the jinas and of Samantabhadri, the absolute nature of reality, free of all
arising, cessation, and abiding, is none other than this pristine space. [345]
All of samsara, nirvana, and the paths are of one taste in the nature of space,
and space is the essential nature of the whole of samsara and nirvana. Space is
the universal ground of the totality of samsara and nirvana. Upon recognizing
and fathoming space as a display of the whole of samsara and nirvana, and upon
realizing that they are not other than space, you will fathom this space; and
the experience of space is called the yoga of space. Upon realizing everything
as great emptiness, fathoming emptiness as space itself is the real essence of
the meaning of
Page 239
emptiness. That is the meaning of possessing the primordial wisdom of manifest
awareness."
Then the entire gathering of disciples, including Bodhisattva Vidyavajra,
expressed this prayer with one voice and with one intent:
O may reality-itself, free of conceptual elaboration, the spontaneous presence
of the dharmakaya,
And the glory of the embodiments and primordial wisdoms
Be witness to the realization of this prayer!
By the force of enlightened knowledge, compassion, and power,
Let there be blessings that this prayer may be realized without interferences!
Hum. With the wisdom of realizing identitylessness,
May we authentically realize [346]
The primordially pure, all-pervasive dharmakaya,
The absolute nature of the great, even purity of samsara and nirvana,
Free of the conceptual elaborations of the eight extremes,
And emptiness endowed with the three doors of liberation. ********
Due to the circumstance of grasping onto the self,
A label is imputed upon a non-existent basis of designation.
With discerning wisdom
May we realize that as great identitylessness.
In the great, pervasive ground of the absolute nature
Page 240
The animate and inanimate universe arises due to delusive ego grasping.
With discerning wisdom
May we realize that as great emptiness.
With discerning wisdom
May we realize the phenomena of causes and effects
And all appearances of benefit and harm by gods and demons
As great nonobjectivity.
With discerning wisdom
May we realize the buddhas and sentient beings
And all objectification and reification of hopes and fears
As great identitylessness.
With discerning wisdom
May we realize the apparitions of the eight collections of consciousness
And all appearances of sensory objects
As great identitylessness.
As the subjective and objective phenomena of the world
Are like the ten illusory analogies, [347]
With the wisdom of realizing identitylessness
May we comprehend them as great nonobjectivity.
With the wisdom of seeing the full range of phenomena,
Page 241
May we know, just as it is,
The great expanse that totally encompasses
The dharmas, paths, and fruitions of the yanas.
May we realize the authentic view
Of awakening into enlightenment
In the displays of the pure equality of samara and nirvana
In the primordially pure, original ground.
Thus, samsara, nirvana, and the path
Are like displays of reflections in the ocean.
May the great non-duality, the spirit of awakening, manifest,
And may we reach the supreme path.
With no meditation, free of any attentional object,
With the non-duality of a subject and object of observation,
Free of clinging to negation and affirmation,
May we release action and reach the supreme path.
Once the obscuring veils of ignorance
Have been removed from the face of the dharmakaya, the original, primordial
ground,
May we reach the foremost of paths
With the great, primordial wisdom of awareness.
May we swiftly reach the foremost of paths
In which we fathom the depths of experiencing
Page 242
Mastery in the great non-meditation of reality-itself, [348]
Free of the effort of progressing in the training.
Once the body, speech, and mind have entered the vajra womb,61
And the embodiments and the eye of great primordial wisdom
Have been freed of muddled, habitual contaminations,
May there be a direct vision of reality-itself.
Due to the virtues of direct vision,
May we experience the benefits
Of the superb Very Joyful Ground
And the grounds and paths of a mature vidyadhara.
With the growth of meditative experiences and realizations,
As a result of all impure appearances being transmuted
Into the limpidity of the pure absolute nature,
May experiential visions progress.
By the power of the progression of experiential visions,
May we transcend the [fifth] ground known as Difficult to Purify,
And may we attain all the qualities of the grounds and paths
Of a vidyadhara who has mastery over life.
Once awareness has ripened to its vital essence,
May awareness come to its consummate state,
In which the phenomenal world is purified
_______________
61 This refers to one's body, speech, and mind transforming into the body-
vajra, speech-vajra, and mind-vajra of a buddha.
Page 243
As great displays of the embodiments and buddha-fields.
Due to the virtues of consummate awareness,
May we transcend the [eighth] ground known as the Immovable,
And may we attain all the qualities of the grounds and paths
Of a Mahamudra vidyadhara.
Once all the appearances of phenomena have been extinguished
In great, intellect-transcending reality-itself, [349]
May we attain confidence and hold our ground,
And may we proceed to the Path of No More Training.
By the power of the intellect-transcending extinction of phenomena,
May we transcend the great [tenth] ground known as the Cloud of Dharma,
And may we swiftly attain the qualities of the grounds and paths
Of a spontaneously present vidyadhara.
Thus, may we come to the culmination in this very life
Of the essential Dharma of this swift path,
And before long, may we swiftly attain
The state of a buddha.
May the primordial wisdom of knowledge and seeing
Come ablaze in great, pervasive reality-itself,
And may the three realms of samsara be totally
Page 244
Transformed into the nature of the three embodiments.
May all impure, delusive phenomena
Be released right now
Into the space of great, primordial purity,
Like the dissolution of illusory phantoms.
May the mental states and appearances of all sentient beings
Be dissolved into the great, inner, original, absolute nature,
Like dreams vanishing into the absolute nature,
And may we become enlightened as Kumarakalasakaya."62
Then the Revealer of the Original Ground said, "O Vidyavajra, as for the
prayers made by ordinary beings, first they should invoke all the jinas as
their witnesses, and finally in order to have their prayers realized, [350]
they should repeat their words of truth. Moreover, if potent mantras are
recited less than seven times, it is very difficult for them to be effective.
On the other hand, if prayers are made and words of truth are uttered before a
physical representation of the objects of refuge, in the presence of your
spiritual mentor,
_______________
62 According to the dictionary Bod rgya tshig mdzod chen mo (p. 2432), this
term (Tib. gzhon nu bum sku), literally meaning "youthful vase body," is unique
to the Great Perfection tradition. It refers to the awareness of Samantabhadra,
which is of the oceanic nature of the embodiments and primordial wisdoms having
six qualities: (1) externally luminous consciousness is withdrawn into itself,
and the great, internally luminous, original, ground-absolute nature appears to
itself, (2) it transcends the ground, (3) it differentiates, (4) it is
liberated upwards, (5) it arises from nothing else, and (6) it dwells in its
own place.
According to Gyatrul Rinpoche, this state of awakening is likened to a vase,
for, as the sole bindu, it encompasses the whole of samsara and nirvana, while
transcending the three times. It is called "youthful," for it is not subject to
aging or degeneration, and it is called a "body," for it is the aggregate of
all the inexhaustible bodies, speech, minds, qualities, and enlightened
activities of all the buddhas.
Page 245
in the midst of an assembly of many Sangha members, on the thirtieth day of the
lunar month, or at the time of a solar or lunar eclipse, they will be
realized."
Page 246
Then Bodhisattva Vidyavajra asked, "O Teacher, Bhagavan, when practicing this
unsurpassed, supreme yana, the profound and secret Great Perfection, are there,
or are there not, pitfalls and obstacles that lead to mistakes? If there are
such, may the Teacher explain what they are!"
He replied, "O Vidyavajra, when first establishing the profound view, there is
the danger of mistaking understanding for realization. How so? Understanding is
just taking in the oral explanation of your teacher. This is like memorizing
the words of a textbook without examining their meaning. By merely reciting
what you have heard, without fathoming its meaning, you may have the conceit of
thinking, 'I know it,' [351] but it has really not reached your mind-stream.
That is just understanding, but it is not realization. One who arrogantly takes
this for realization is like someone who has never seen a king's treasury and
has no claim on it, but who has heard others' reports about the treasury and
memorized them, and then thinks, 'That is my treasury.' This is utterly
pointless.
As for realization, whether it concerns explanations by your teacher, seeing
the real meaning of the tantras, oral transmissions, or practical instructions,
or something that emerges from the expanse of your own wisdom, first you may
understand just a fraction. Then with that as a catalyst, you repeatedly
investigate, and come to a subtle, exact knowledge of how all appearing
phenomena are nonobjective and empty from their own side. Finally, you
decisively fathom the one taste of great emptiness, the fact that all of
samsara and nirvana naturally arises from the expanse of the ground and is not
established as anything else. That is realization. If you lacked firm, vast,
and profound wisdom that does not entertain the slightest doubt about this, and
the entire world, together with its gods, were to teach you repeatedly that
samsara and nirvana are substantial, permanent, stable, and immutable, you
would turn
Page 247
back from the path of liberation. [352] The nature of realization is that of
meditation, for there is no meditation superior to realization. First you
understand, then you gain experience, and finally you reach the depths of
realization. Without that, there is nothing deserving the labels of the view or
meditation, for there is not even a trace of them. So be aware of the
indispensability of firm realization arising in one's mind-stream.
Not knowing how to distinguish between realization and gaining confidence, many
people mistake one for the other and thereby deceive themselves. So learn how
to make that distinction. Realization refers to correctly knowing with
certainty the manner in which the nature of the grounds and paths and the triad
of samsara, nirvana, and the path are all completely present in awareness
itself. There are many people who say that the knowledge of those who go
through great hardships, experiencing a myriad of joys and sorrows, is genuine
realization, but the knowledge of those who gain immediate insight into the
nature of reality does not count as realization. That is incorrect. Consider
this analogy: some very devout people wishing to make a pilgrimage to the three
types of holy representations in Lhasa, Samye, and so on, courageously make a
long and arduous journey to those places of pilgrimage and encounter those holy
representations. [353] Some other people who were born in those pilgrimage
sites also encounter those holy representations, without hardship or any
display of courage. There is no difference in the encounters of those two
groups of people. What they are encountering is the three types of
representations, and there is no difference in those encounters. Moreover, the
unimpeded knowledge of all the outer, inner, and secret representations on the
part of those who were born in those holy places is the same. Likewise; there
is not the slightest difference between (1) one who identifies reality-itself,
the mode of existence of suchness, after experiencing many hardships, joys, and
sorrows,
Page 248
and (2) one who establishes, by means of discerning primordial wisdom, the
identitylessness of all the phenomena of samsara and nirvana, and then directly
realizes and knows the mode of existence of reality-itself. What each one needs
to do is to ascertain reality-itself, the mode of existence of suchness, and
identify the awareness that is present as the ground. There is no difference
there whatsoever.
Realizing, ascertaining, and fathoming the meaning is called the view. As for
gaining confidence, first you identify [awareness], then you bring forth
inactive, wonderfully spacious awareness, and by practicing that unterruptedly,
[354] finally you achieve stability within yourself. Then without any deviation
in terms of times or situations--like the absence of darkness once dawn has
broken--it is said that you have gained confidence for yourself. As soon as you
first gain realization, if you do not gain confidence by applying yourself to
practice, even though you have identified your own essential nature, you will
die as an ordinary person, and you will have to wander in the cycle of
existence. As analogies to this, even if you possess a mountain of food but do
not eat it, it will be of no use and you will die of starvation; and even if
you own a castle filled with clothing, if you do not wear it, you will die from
exposure to the elements. Therefore, recognize the vital importance of gaining
confidence.
If you do not know how to distinguish between the mind and awareness, you will
confuse the mind for awareness, which will unfortunately lead to obstacles to
the state of liberation. So know how to distinguish them! As for the mind,
there is the deluded mind that clings to appearances, the mind that seeks the
path by way of negation and affirmation, and the mind that makes consciousness
its path.
The deluded mind that clings to appearances is the ordinary mind of sentient
beings who do not seek the path and who do not see the entrances to
Page 249
the real paths. The mind that seeks the path is said to take the mind as its
path, for in this case, [355] the mind observes the mind, ideation is observed
by ideation, and one seeks the path of merely arousing pleasure and pain
through intellectual modifications and the acceptance and rejection [of virtue
and vice]. As for the mind that makes consciousness its path, the experience of
unceasing, ordinary consciousness, which is the ground of the mind, does not
entail realizing the view. Consequently, outer appearances are reduced to
something ethically neutral, and those appearances are taken to be real, so
reification is not counteracted; inwardly, your own body appears to be
ethically neutral, so the reification of grasping onto the body is not
counteracted; and since both outer and inner appearances are taken to be
ethically neutral and substantially existent, you do not transcend the mind, so
that, too, is called the mind. Even if that were called awareness--like giving
a boy's name to an unborn fetus--the characteristic of ascertaining awareness
in itself would not have been realized. Not realizing samsara and nirvana as
great emptiness is non-awareness, and on the basis of the functions of
awareness and non-awareness, those terms are conventionally accepted.
Awareness first establishes everything included in the phenomenal world of
samsara and nirvana as emptiness. [356] Just as the reflections of the planets
and stars in the ocean have no existence apart from the ocean, and yet they are
of the same nature as displays of the ocean; and just as rainbows in the sky
have no existence apart from the sky, and yet those appearances are of the same
nature as displays of the sky; in the same manner, finally, one truly knows
that things appear even though nothing exists from the side of appearances,
that all appearances of the animate and inanimate world have no existence apart
from the ground-sugatagarbha, and yet those appearances are of the same nature
as
Page 250
displays of the ground-sugatagarbha. And with that knowledge, awareness
manifests.
As if the dawn were breaking in the sky, without need of meditation, one
comprehends samsara and nirvana as being totally subsumed within great
Awakening. Without need of examination, there is the self-awareness, without
grasping, that the whole of samsara and nirvana is like reflections of the
planets and stars in the ocean. Without need of modification, there is natural
liberation in the ground absolute nature, the great, pure equality of samsara
and nirvana. Without need of objectification, there is a spacious dissolution
into the great expanse, with no object, without obstruction, and without
intentionality .You experience and gain mastery over the inexhaustible
ornamental wheels of the bodies, speech, minds, qualities, and enlightened
activities of the jinas and jinaputras of the three times. Ultimately, simply
due to identifying the dharmakaya, the awareness that is present as the ground,
{357] you gain mastery over the life force of samsara and nirvana. This is not
like articulating circumstances involving such things as water and multicolored
paper that are used to give rise to a mind that receives initiation. Rather,
you know you have obtained the empowerments of the jinas and jinaputras and the
oral transmissions of all the writings that emerge from the primordial wisdom
of awareness. Thus, you have already, simultaneously obtained all empowerments
and oral transmissions. Therefore, recognize the importance of not mistaking
the mind for awareness.
If you do not know how to distinguish between cognition and wisdom, you will
confuse cognition for wisdom, as a result of which you run the danger of
wasting your entire life. So know how to distinguish them! Cognition is the
mind of every sentient being, which serves as the basis for the emergence of
all ideation. It is the limpid, clear nature of the unceasing flow of objects,
and it is
                                                                Go_To_Next_Page
